A 44-year- old super-morbidly- obese man body mass index (BMI 63) underwent sleeve gastrectomy for weight loss and was found to have multiple adenomatous fundic gland polyps on final pathology.
Subsequent workup included esophagogastroduodenoscopy which revealed innumerable polyps of the remaining gastric fundus and body consistent with fundic gland polyps, normal duodenum without polyps, and Barrett’s oesophagus.
Colonoscopy was significant for innumerable polyps of varying sizes up to 1.
5 cm throughout the colon, with relative rectal sparing.
Biopsies were consistent with tubular adenoma and hyperplastic polyps.
Thyroid ultrasound was within normal limits and abdominal CT was significant for left-sided 3.
4 cm mesenteric mass representing scarring versus possible desmoid.
Family history was significant for colon cancer diagnosed in his maternal grandfather at age 72, paternal grandmother who died of metastatic cancer at age 50 with unknown primary and mother diagnosed with thyroid cancer at age 40.
Physical examination was notable for morbid obesity (BMI 45), cardiopulmonary examination within normal limits and abdomen with well-healing surgical scars from prior sleeve gastrectomy.
A 32-year-old man presented to a regional general surgical unit for severe symptomatic anaemia.
Within a span of 4 months his haemoglobin dropped by 62 points from 137 gL (N: 135–180 gL).
His medical history included epilepsy on Valproate, heart arrhythmia on Flecainide, carpal tunnel syndrome and C5 nerve root compression.
He is a non-smoker, rare alcohol user, has two dogs at home, and two children.
His family history included his grandfather who had bowel cancer diagnosed at 78 years old, and a grandmother with breast cancer.
The first imaging modality was a CT scan showing a large fungating mass in the body of the stomach extending into the pylorus and first part of the duodenum.
He underwent upper gastrointestinal endoscopy (UGE) to investigate the pathology.
Histopathology frequently returned as benign hyperplastic tissue.
The first histopathology results reported gastric mucosa with minor foveolar hyperplasia, stromal oedema with minor increase in chronic inflammatory cells.
There was no evidence of helicobacter organisms, active gastritis or atypia.
Initial scope findings showed carpet-like polyps lining the gastric antrum and body.
On a second UGE, tunnel biopsies were performed, showing the carpet-like polyps have progressed into the first part of the duodenum, in comparison to previous UGE The biopsy returned as Helicobacter heilmannii-associated chronic gastritis with hyperplastic changes of fundic gland polyp.
Serum ANA, ANCA, antiparietal cell antibodies, Cytomegalovirus infection serology, hepatitis panel, serum protein electrophoresis, Helicobacter serology and CA 72–4 tumour marker were ordered.
Results came back negative except for a positive Helicobacter IgG serology.
H.
heilmannii was treated with two courses of Helicobacter eradication regime.
Repeat UGE, 2 months later, showed no evidence of Helicobacter organism.
Histopathology results were hyperplastic gastric polyp with background of mild chronic inflammation.
Repeat UGE 3 months after the initial UGE showed Paris classification 0-Isp in the duodenum and the polyps have extended further into the oesophagus.
An endoscopic mucosal resection was performed on the oesophageal polyp with histopathology returning as juvenile polyp.
Narrow-band imaging of a polyp in the gastric body showed irregular microvascular and irregular microsurface pattern.
A colonoscopy revealed two 2–3 mm polyps in the ascending colon and caecum, and one 5 mm semipedunculated polyp in the sigmoid colon.
The colonic lesions resembled Kudo’s Pit pattern.
Histopathology of caecum and descending colon polyps returned as inflammatory juvenile polyps.
Capsule endoscopy revealed scattered 0–1 p small bowel polyps and areas of telangiectasia.
In December 1990, a 24-year-old female was referred with recent onset blurred vision in the right eye.
She had no previous ophthalmic history and was systemically well.
There was also no family history of any eye diseases.
Visual acuities were 3/60 right eye and 6/18 left eye.
Posterior segment examination showed bilateral active retinal neovascularisation with vitreous haemorrhages in both eyes.
There was no evidence of diabetes mellitus, and she had wide range of investigations, all of which were normal.
She was labelled as idiopathic retinal neovascularisation.
The patient was treated with bilateral panretinal photocoagulation and pars plana vitrectomy.
Her vision and retinal status stabilised with acuities of 6/9 in the right eye and counting fingers in left eye after subsequent cataract surgery.
In 2010 she was referred with a painless lump in her left breast for 2 months.
She had a history of a previous benign right breast lump and thyroidectomy for a benign goiter 3 years ago.
Family history revealed that her sister had had breast cancer at the age of 43 and her daughter a renal cell carcinoma at the age of 18 years.
Biopsy showed an invasive carcinoma of the breast and after treatment with local excision, radiotherapy and tamoxifen went into remission.
A 30-year-old man with a history of chronic abdominal pain episodes, constipation and rectal bleeding was seen at our unit.
Physical examination revealed the presence of hyperchromic spots on the lips and in the mucosal palate, with no other relevant findings.
His father was diagnosed with PJS at the age of 35 years.
A colonoscopy was performed, revealing the presence of multiple sessile polypoid lesions of different sizes from 3 mm to 5 cm along the entire colon and terminal ileum.
Histopathology reported multilobulated polyps with a papillary surface and branching bands of smooth muscle covered by hyperplastic glandular mucosa, consistent with hamartomatous polyps.
Thus, PJS diagnosis was established in our patient and a surveillance programme was offered.
Upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy and small bowel capsule endoscopy were performed, revealing multiple hamartomatous polyps along the small bowel with no suspicion of gastrointestinal malignancies.
Three months later, the patient was seen at the emergency department because of the abrupt onset of severe anal pain with a foreign body sensation in the anal canal and rectal bleeding.
Physical examination revealed a giant, reddish-blue prolapsed polyp with a necrotic aspect.
An 85-year-old man was referred to rheumatology with walking difficulties and elevation of serum creatine kinase (CK).
Initial tests revealed elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 76 mm/hour
normal C reactive protein (CRP) and serum CK of 525 IU/L.
Antinuclear and extractable nuclear antibodies (including anti-Jo1) were negative.
Investigations for myopathy included MRI Stir sequence (figure 1) demonstrated increased signal in the hip adductors bilaterally, consistent with symmetrical myositis.
CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis, requested to exclude occult cancer, revealed diffuse infiltration of the mesentery and retroperitoneal fat (figure 2), despite lack of abdominal symptoms.
This appearance was initially considered suspicious of malignancy without an obvious primary lesion
however, mesenteric biopsy reported only hyaline fatty sclerosis.
On follow-up, the patient described spontaneous bruising.
Serum protein electrophoresis was initially normal, although urine for Bence-Jones protein showed Lambda light chain of 0.
03 g/24 hours.
The possibility of amyloidosis was considered, and Congo Red stain of the existing mesenteric biopsy was requested, which was positive.
Bone marrow biopsy showed 15% plasma cells, and serum analysis demonstrated raised free light Lambda chain of 102 mg/L.
The final diagnosis was systemic AL (lambda-type) amyloidosis, with muscle infiltration mimicking myositis.
Two patterns of peritoneal amyloid have been described on imaging: diffuse and nodular types.
Our patient had the diffuse pattern of peritoneal amyloid
We present the case of a man in his 40s (patient 1) with a prior history of persistent childhood diarrhoea and cognitive- developmental delay.
The patient presented to our neurology outpatient clinic with a 10- year history of progressive gait impairment and recent episodes of falls.
The patient has one healthy brother and three sisters, two of whom (labelled as patients 2 and 3) also manifested cognitive impairment—see figure 1.
All impaired siblings reported cataract extraction before the age of 20.
Patient 2 had previously complained of ankle swelling in an orthopaedic evaluation 15 years earlier and performed ankle- joint MRI, deemed inconclusive.
On examination, all patients exhibited low stature, appendicular ataxia, pyramidal signs and broad- based ataxic gait.
Patient 2’s lower limb examination also showed marked pes cavus, clawing of the toes and Achilles’ tendon xanthomas (figure 2A).
Brain MRI sagittal T1- weighted image revealed cerebellar atrophy (figure 2B) and axial T2- weighted image displayed hyperintensities within the dentate nuclei (figure 2C) in patient 1.
The combination of cerebellar ataxia, early- onset cataracts and tendon xanthomas prompted testing for serum cholestanol, which was significantly raised (patient 1: 119 µmol/L
patient 2: 120 µmol/L
patient 3: 84 µmol/L, N: 3.
5–23.
8 µmol/L).
A 43-year-old Caucasian female experienced MCAS symptoms at age 18: specific foods and odours caused flushing, rashes, itching, wheezing, dizziness and nausea.
At age 20, she noted problems with postprandial bloating/pain, constipation, evacuating stool and flatus with rotten egg odour.
Restless legs syndrome (RLS) gradually developed.
At age 23, she developed orthostatic lightheadedness and tachycardia, body pain, generalised weakness and painful dependent leg oedema.
Ultimately, she suffered from 45 individual clinically significant symptoms (table 1).
For 6 years, she became disabled owing to orthostatic symptoms, fatigue and body pain.
Faecal evacuation resulted in syncope with efforts >3 min.
Early satiety led to a liquid diet.
Pressure-induced hives and angioedema, paraesthesia and nocturnal urination (seven times nightly) interfered with sleep.
Over 16 years, 19 physicians failed to diagnose POTS and MCAS which were established at a second location of the Mayo Clinic.
Supine pulse of 80 beats/min increased to 160 after standing 10 min.
Facial rash and oedema, cold, blue hands, Terry’s fingernails and dermatographism were present.
A full-term, 2710 g male infant was born at 39 weeks through spontaneous vaginal delivery.
Routine antenatal ultrasounds found intrauterine growth restriction, left kidney agenesis, persistent left superior vena cava and suspicion of intestinal atresia.
There was a history of polyhydramnios.
Parents were not consanguineous and there was no relevant family history of congenital malformations on either parent’s side.
At birth, Apgar scores were 5, 10 and 10 at 1, 5 and 10 min, respectively.
Physical examination showed increased oral secretions, difficult breathing requiring supplemental oxygen through face-mask ventilation and abdominal distension.
An orogastric tube could not be passed into the stomach, and a chest and abdominal X-ray diagnosed oesophageal atresia with distal tracheo-oesophageal fistula and intestinal obstruction, later confirmed during surgery.
No other dysmorphic findings were present.
Antibiotics were then started and a replogle tube was placed into the upper oesophageal pouch for continuous suctioning of the saliva.
Vertebral defects, Anal atresia, Cardiac anomalies, Tacheo-Esophageal fistula, Renal anomalies, and Limb anomalies (VACTERL) workup included renal ultrasound, which confirmed renal agenesis, and echocardiography, thus revealing interventricular communication and patent ductus arteriosus.
The patient underwent exploratory laparotomy, performed on the first day of life.
Perioperative bronchoscopy confirmed a distal tracheo-oesophageal fistula.
Laparotomy revealed gastric distension and a type IIIa ileal atresia with an intestinal perforation of the proximal ileal pouch and a microcolon.
A gastrostomy and a diverting ileostomy were created.
Due to clinical instability, the abdominal oesophagus was encircled by a silicone rubber 6F tube placed around the gastro-oesophageal junction simulating a Pringle manoeuvre.
Additionally, both ends of the tube were brought through the abdominal incision to provide extracorporeal occlusion of the abdominal oesophagus, thus preventing aspiration and overdistension of the stomach due to the tracheo-oesophageal fistula.
Eight days later, the patient underwent thoracoscopy and tracheo-oesophageal fistula closure, without primary oesophageal anastomosis due to a long-gap oesophageal atresia diagnosis.
Postoperatively, the patient was kept on enteral feedings by gastrostomy and suctioning of the upper oesophageal pouch.
A water-soluble contrast enema was performed on the 27th day of life to determine colon anatomy and revealed a non-fixed coiled microcolon in the right abdominal quadrants.
A daily saline rectal enema was then initiated to enlarge the colon.
Subsequently, an ileocaecal anastomosis was performed at 7 weeks of life
a microcolon was still present.
A 7-year-old female child was brought with complaints of tightness of skin since the past 1 year, starting on the lower limbs and gradually progressing to involve the whole body.
Joint contractures resulting in severe disability were present since 5 months.
She had no history of trauma or vaccination.
There was no personal or family history of autoimmune disease, Raynaud's phenomenon, difficulty in swallowing, or retrosternal burning pain.
On examination, there was generalized sclerosis of the skin involving the extremities, trunk, and face.
Dyspigmented sclerotic plaques, few of them crusted, were seen all over the body.
Her limbs were fixed by contractures to an extent that she could not walk [Figures ​[Figures11 and ​and2].
2].
Chest expansion was reduced due to chest wall sclerosis.
There was bilateral lagophthalmos and ectropion.
Scars of previous healed ulcerations were seen on legs.
Investigations showed hemoglobin of 7.
1 g/dl and erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 53 mm in the first hour.
Anti-nuclear antibody was positive (1:80, speckled pattern), anti-dsDNA and anti Scl-70 antibodies were negative.
Chest radiograph and high resolution computed tomography-thorax were normal.
Barium swallow showed evidence of gastroesophageal reflux.
Pulmonary function test was not possible as patient was unable to blow.
Radiographs of the limb bones were normal.
Histopathology showed a sclerotic dermis with tightly packed collagen fibers, sclerosis involving the deeper layers of subcutaneous tissue and fascia with marked reduction of skin adnexae and a small amount of lymphohistiocytic inflammatory infiltrate.
Patient was started on tablet methotrexate 7.
5 mg/week.
However, after 3 months, as there was no improvement, inj.
methylprednisolone 15 mg/kg intravenously as a pulse for 3 consecutive days was added.
The condition of the patient continued to deteriorate with increasing sclerosis, most evident in periorbital area [Figure 3], development of recalcitrant cutaneous ulcers, and cicatricial alopecia over scalp.
Meanwhile, she started developing cyanotic discoloration of the digits of the right foot [Figure 4].
On evaluation, patient was found to have thrombosis of right dorsalis pedis artery.
A normal 2D echocardiography ruled out a cardiac source.
Heparin followed by oral warfarin, aspirin, and clopidogrel failed in preventing gangrene and autoamputation of the 2nd right toe.
At this time, PUVA with 8-methoxypsoralen was started.
However, she could take only 2 sittings before succumbing due to septicemia.
A male neonate was born at 35+4 weeks gestation with an unusual and distinctive appearance (figure 1).
His skin was extremely thick and taut (hyperkeratotic), yellow and split by deep fissures into plates, resembling a harlequin jester costume.
The digits of his hands and feet were fused and flexed, encased in thick shiny skin.
The sclera was occluded by severe ectropion and chemosis.
He had marked eversion of the lips, eclabium.
The pinnae and nostrils were rudimentary and bound down.
He was pink and well perfused and required no resuscitative intervention.
The paediatric team reviewed and transferred him to the neonatal unit.
There was no family history of ichthyosis.
His parents are consanguineous, second cousins, originally from Pakistan.
His mother had gestational diabetes requiring insulin.
The couple has two older boys who are healthy.
On the neonatal unit, the diagnosis of congenital harlequin ichthyosis was suspected and confirmed by a Paediatric Dermatologist on reviewing photographs.
Full supportive care, which included an intensive emollient and skin care regime and protein supplements, was initiated.
Oral acitretin was commenced on day 3 of life and continues to this day.
After a 29-day stay on the unit, he was discharged to the care of his family and community healthcare team, with ongoing multidisciplinary team (MDT) support.
Now 12 years old, his skin remains intensely erythematous with generalised scaling but his eyes and ears are much improved.
He has persistent ectropion, epiphora (tear spillage) and myopia.
However, despite his hypoplastic pinnae, his hearing is normal.
His digits remain flexed and he has lost the tips of two fingers.
He has extensive scarring alopecia and minimal sweating ability which leads to heat intolerance.
He attends mainstream school with the help of a classroom assistant and retains the support of an MDT, including paediatrics, dermatology, ophthalmology, ear, nose and throat (ENT), physiotherapy, dietetics and children’s community nursing.
A 22-year-old girl, presented to us with a history of progressive knee deformity and difficulty in walking of 5 years duration.
She was born of consanguineous marriage at term by normal vaginal delivery, third in birth order with two normal sibs.
She was noticed to have collodion membrane at birth which was shed within 48 h to be followed by generalised erythema and fish-like scaly skin lesions which persisted in the subsequent years.
She was also noticed to have a negligible sweating from childhood.
She was immunised appropriately and developmental milestones were normal.
She was average in scholastic performances but dropped out from school in the 9th standard due to social disfigurement and used to stay mostly indoors limiting average daily sun exposure to around 15 min during winter and almost negligible during summer.
Her menstrual history was normal.
Since 17 years of age she started having pain in both the knees with difficulty in walking, climbing stairs and rising up from squatting position.
Gradually she noticed valgus deformity of the knees involving initially the right and then the left within a period of 6 months.
She also complained of mild burning sensation and grittiness of her eyes since 14 years of age associated with mild difficulty in hearing and right ear discharge.
There was no history of trauma to the knees, fractures, chronic diarrhoea or steatorrhoea suggestive of malabsorption or any history of renal disorder.
Dietary history revealed adequate intake of foods rich in calcium and vitamin D.
There was no family history of similarly affected individuals.
Treatment history included various topical applications like glycerine and urea cream since childhood and intermittent oral retinoid therapy for the past 3 years.
Examination revealed a height of 153 cm (25th–50th percentile), weight of 40 kg, (5th–10th percentile), body mass index of 17.
09, upper segment:lower segment ratio of 1.
23 and an arm span of 153 cm.
Mid-parental target height was 156 cm.
Large fine grey scales were seen mostly on trunk and limbs with minimal involvement of face and sparing of palms and soles (figure 1).
Dandruff was present and mucosal surfaces and teeth were normal.
She had bilateral madarosis on lateral aspects.
There was bilateral genu valgum with intermalleolar distance of 7.
5 inches (figure 2A).
Routine investigations including serum creatinine and blood gas analysis were normal.
Serum thyroid stimulating hormone was 2.
17 µIU/ml, serum calcium: 8.
8 (8.
5–10.
2) mg/dl, serum phosphorus: 3.
2 (2.
5–4.
5) mg/dl, serum albumin: 4.
1 gm/dl, serum alkaline phosphatase: 485 (38–126) U/l, 25-hydroxy-vitamin D: 9.
12 ng/ml (deficiency <20 ng/ml), serum parathyroid hormone (PTH): 68.
8 (14–72) pg/ml.
Radiographs showed valgus deformity of both knees (figure 2B) with thinned out cortex.
A dexa scan was done which revealed a T score of −2.
1 at the lumbar spine suggestive of osteopenia and a T score of −0.
8 at the hip.
Skin biopsy revealed mild-to-moderate epidermal acanthosis with a well-formed, focally thickened granular layer and thick laminated bright pink ‘ichthyotic’ stratum corneum, features consistent with lamellar ichthyosis (figure 3).
Ophthalmological evaluation revealed superficial punctuate keratitis bilaterally (figure 4).
She was also found to have chronic suppurative ottitis media bilaterally with central perforation on right.
Pure tone audiometry revealed bilateral conductive hearing loss.
Dermatology opinion was taken and she was started on oral retinoids and topical emollients.
A male patient in his late 70s who was a known case of hypertension and controlled with indapamide was seen at our facility.
His medical history included a postspinal tumour that had been treated with surgery and radiation more than 40 years ago and had a residual left-sided hemiplegia.
He presented to the otolaryngology clinic at Al-Hada Armed Forces Hospital having right ear pain and purulent discharge.
His pain had started 6 months before presenting to the clinic and was constant and progressive since then.
The pain was associated with a bilateral decrease in hearing for a long time.
Local right ear examination revealed a right ear soft granular tissue mass occupying the right EAC mainly in the posterior wall of the canal with bleeding on touch.
The right tympanic membrane could not be visualised.
The first clinical impression was otitis externa after which a culture was taken from the discharge.
The patient was managed with betamethasone and fucidin and given an appointment to assess the response to local medications.
By the time of the follow-up appointment, the culture showed no growth
however, the patient did not improve, and right ear otalgia and the purulent discharge had increased in severity.
An examination revealed an oedematous canal with pus and a non-visible tympanic membrane.
We present a 33-year-old woman, without family history of TSC, with clinical diagnosis of TSC since 12 years old.
A mutation in TSC2 gene was detected later.
She had dermatological (facial angiofibromas and subungual fibromas), neurological (SEGA), renal (angiomyolipomas) and pulmonary (lymphangioleiomyomatosis) involvement, and was in period of reduction the dose of levetiracetam because she was considering to get pregnant.
She did not take any mTOR inhibitor medication for the same reason.
She presented complaints of reduced visual acuity, horizontal binocular diplopia and right eye (RE) esotropia, for the last 3 days.
She denied headache, vomiting or nausea.
The neuro-ophthalmological examination revealed: right abducens nerve palsy, best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 7/10 in the RE and 8/10 in the left eye (LE), and in the ocular fundus signs of pale oedema of both optic discs and lesions consistent with retinal hamartomas bilaterally.
A non-smoking 57-year-old female presented with long-standing mild dyspnea and dry cough.
Her medical history was remarkable for a subcutaneous right cervical nodule which corresponded pathologically to a neurofibroma.
There were no other signs for type 1 neurofibromatosis as she had no family history of neurofibromatosis, no «café au lait» macules, no axillary or groin freckling, no plexiform neurofibroma, no cutaneous/subcutaneous neurofibroma and no Lisch nodules.
Genetic testing for the Neurofibromin 1 (NF1) gene mutations was negative.
MRI of the brain, spine and pelvis was normal, except for the right cervical neurofibroma measuring 4.
5 cm in greatest diameter.
Pulmonary function tests showed no obstructive or restrictive pattern.
The chest radiograph demonstrated enlargement of the upper mediastinum with bilateral non-cavitating lobulated opacities (figure 1).
Thoracic CT scan showed multiple bilateral round and non-compressive nodules and masses in the superior, anterior and posterior mediastinum, along with mediastinal lymphadenopathies (figure 2).
A 22-year-old illiterate farmer who was psychologically subdued due to social ridicule reported to our hospital in January 2010 with reports of severe pain and discharge from his left eye since the past 15 days.
Further detailed history revealed a progressively increasing hard swelling in his left lower lid since 10 years associated with proptosis, since 5 years.
On general examination an irregular, hard lesion of 4×5 cm was present in the left inferior orbital region (figure 1A–C), a cystic swelling of 6×7 cm in the left high parietal region and another similar one of 3×4 cm in the lower lumbar region.
In addition, two firm swellings of 1×1 cm in the right paraorbital region and a 2×2 cm in the right forearm were concomitantly present.
On ophthalmological examination, corneal opacity and parapapillary atrophy was present (figure 2A, B).
On the basis of these findings, a presumptive diagnosis of GS was made.
Moving on the same track the per abdominal examination was found to be normal and on repeated probing no abnormality was detected apart from a history of his father's death due to some unknown abdominal condition.
A 40-year-old woman hailing from a village in eastern India presented with a 6-year history of generalised asymptomatic pigmentary skin alterations.
Her medical history was significant for diabetes mellitus for which she was on oral hypoglycaemic agent for past 4 years.
She had no history of any pre-existing dermatoses.
She reported that some of her village neighbours also had similar cutaneous ailments.
None of her immediate family members were affected.
The primary source of drinking water in her village was a deep tube well.
She had previously been treated by the village quack without any improvement.
Examination revealed multiple, discrete, guttate hypopigmented macules (2–4 mm) symmetrically dispersed over a hyperpigmented background that involved the trunk and extremities giving a ‘raindrop’ appearance (figure 1).
Few well-demarcated brownish scaly plaques with irregular border were noted over back, abdomen and dorsum of right hand.
Histopathology of one such excised lesion reported Bowen’s disease.
Multiple keratotic papules over palms and soles with gritty sensation on palpation were also noted (figure 1B).
Other mucocutaneous sites were unaffected.
Systemic examination did not reveal any abnormality.
Basic laboratory investigations only revealed mild anaemia.
The clinical diagnosis of chronic arsenicosis was further established by markedly elevated arsenic levels in hair, nail and drinking water samples.
She was counselled to avoid arsenic-contaminated tube well water.
Palmoplantar hyperkeratosis substantially flattened over 3 months with regular use of keratolytic ointment.
Topical 5% 5-fluorouracil for lesions of bowen’s disease led to improvement.
No new-onset cutaneous premalignant or malignant transformation was noted on routine follow-ups.
An asymptomatic 56-year-old woman with a history of multiple basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) and odontogenic keratocysts was referred to the metabolic clinic for assessment of bone density.
On examination, there were no plantar or palmar pits, facial abnormalities or macrocephaly and the family history was also unremarkable.
Osteoporosis was excluded, but plain films showed multiple cysts throughout the long bones (figure 1) and subsequent abdominal CT revealed multiple large mesenteric cysts (figure 2).
Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis confirmed a heterozygous pathogenic deletion in patched 1, consistent with a diagnosis of Gorlin syndrome.
A 55-year-old woman presented with an 8-week history of a gradually enlarging lesion on the neck (figure 1).
Medical history included uterine cancer in 2007 which was treated with hysterectomy, radiotherapy and chemotherapy.
No family history of skin cancer was noted.
A recent diagnosis of diabetes was revealed during serial attendances in the context of a postoperative wound infection.
Histology demonstrated an ulcerated, markedly inflamed tumour, composed of lobules of sebocytes without surrounding desmoplasia and prominent mitoses
this raised suspicions about a diagnosis of a low-grade sebaceous carcinoma (figure 2A, B).
The report, discussed further at a dermatopathology meeting, suggested that extraocular sebaceous carcinomas tend not to be associated with underlying malignancy but may recur locally.
At a follow-up clinic, 11 months postsurgery, it emerged that a series of reviews by other medical specialities had recently culminated in a right hemicolectomy for excision of a bowel mass.
Family history revealed multiple cases positive for bowel cancer, and the non-linked digital pathology records identified a history of rare clear cell endometrial carcinoma and mucinous adenocarcinoma of the bowel.
Loosely placed among other numerous, random reports in the patient's chart was a genetics report, performed by the Oncology services posthysterectomy, noting a c.
942+3A>T splice mutation in IVS5 of the MSH2 gene.
This confirmed our suspicion of hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) and therefore, Muir-Torre syndrome (MTS).
Although the patient had discussed this diagnosis with a number of other physicians in the past, she had not disclosed this to us as she assumed that all physicians would be aware of her diagnosis.
It was revealed that with the exception of regular gynaecological review, no other screening of the patient had occurred.
A 40-year-old woman, affected by achondroplasia, presented to our department with pain and swelling, owing to severe left KOA.
The patient was treated conservatively for several years with physiotherapy, diet and lifestyle modification, medical treatment and articular injections, but with poor results.
Between the ages of 12 and 17 years, due to dwarfism, the patient underwent surgery to lengthen the lower limbs and correct the valgus deformity by osteotomy, using an external fixation.
At the level of the femur, the bone was lengthened on the right and the left side by 18 cm, using a monolateral external fixation and slight acute deformity correction
at the level of the tibia, the bone was lengthened by 15 cm with gradual deformity correction, using a circular external fixation.
The patient also underwent arm lengthening of 5 cm.
On physical examination, she was 4 ft, 9 inches tall, weighed 102 lbs and had a body mass index of 22.
1, in good general condition.
The left knee presented a coronal valgus malalignment of 10°, joint effusion, and mediolateral instability due to collateral medial ligament laxity and stiffness, with a range of motion from 0° to 80°.
Therefore, the patient was experiencing difficulties when carrying out regular daily activities.
The right knee presented with clinical and radiological signs of moderate osteoarthritis, with little discomfort.
No differences in lower limb length were present.
Blood tests and history excluded conditions that can cause secondary osteoarthritis (eg, gout, rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes, hormone disorders, etc).
A plain X-ray, in a standing position, with an anteroposterior and lateral view (figure 1A, B), revealed a valgus deformity of the left knee with severe osteoarthritis, flared metaphysis, and coronal and sagittal metaphyseal angulation.
A 15-year-old boy presented with progressive proximal weakness of the lower limbs starting at 4 years of age followed by involvement of the upper limbs.
He is the product of a consanguineous marriage
he had a family history of similar disease in a second-degree cousin and also had a history of delayed motor developmental milestones since birth.
Clinically, he had flaccid quadriparesis with wasting and contractures without any sensory or neurological involvement.
His weakness worsened leading to an inability to walk without support by the age of 9 and total wheelchair dependence by the age of 12.
He was frequently admitted to hospital with chest infections.
The patient's creatine kinase was 2600 IU/L (normal 50–150 IU/L) and muscle biopsy from left quadriceps showed rounded small muscle fibres with evidence of degeneration and an absence of dystrophin protein.
He was diagnosed as a case of duchenne muscular dystrophy.
He is presently bed bound with weakness and contractures of all limbs and spinal deformities as shown in figure 1.
He developed scoliosis at the age of 12 which has gradually worsened to the present state as shown in figures 2 and 3.
A 21-year-old woman presented at the endocrinology clinic complaining of short stature compared with her siblings and peers.
She had a medical history of precocious puberty
her mother narrated that irregular menses started at the age of 3 years and only become regular when she was 9 years.
Patients’ breasts were also reported to develop since early childhood however galactorrhoea was not observed.
There was no history of bone fractures.
The rest of patient and social history was not significant.
Physical examination revealed a young woman with short stature: height: 1.
37 m, weight: 37 kg, temperature: 36.
7°C, pulse rate: 86 beats per minute, blood pressure: 115/68 mm Hg, café-au-lait skin spots were found on the middle line of the back (figure 1) and lower abdomen.
Both breasts were well developed (Tarner V), with adequate pubic hair distribution (Tarner IV), normal external female genitalia and normal clitoris.
Visual fields and hearing were normal.
A 40-year-old man reported with an 8-month history of pain and pus discharge from the right side of his face.
History revealed that he had undergone extraction of carious mandibular molar teeth 3 years prior, following which he had recurrent pus discharge, pain and swelling.
Since the extraction site did not heal and the patient experienced pain, he subsequently underwent extraction of all his mandibular teeth within 2 years.
Even after extraction of all mandibular teeth there was pus discharge and mandibular fracture.
The patient had hip bone fracture 6 years earlier.
There was no history of drug use or any other disease, and his personal and family histories were unremarkable.
A diffuse, firm and tender swelling was seen on the right body of the mandible, with two pus discharging sinuses.
Intraorally, a single diffuse swelling was seen on the right mandibular alveolus obliterating the buccal sulcus, firm in consistency and slightly tender with discharge of pus on palpation (figure 1).
A panoramic radiograph revealed diffuse osteosclerosis of the maxilla with indistinct trabeculae and marrow spaces.
A ‘moth eaten’ appearance of the right ramus and angle of the mandible with evidence of a fracture malunion was observed (figure 2).
Radiographs of the skull, chest and limbs also showed diffuse osteosclerosis with an Erlenmayer flask deformity seen in the tibia (figure 3).
A 19-year-old man presented with a 15-month history of progressively worsening shortness of breath, orthopnoea, exertional dyspnea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea.
He was found to have a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 25% and was eventually diagnosed with NIDCM.
The patient was not dysmorphic and his physical examination was otherwise normal including a normal neurological examination.
His tone was normal as were his deep tendon reflexes.
He had no muscle weakness or atrophy and there were no signs of primary liver disease.
His medical history was only significant for crystal methamphetamine abuse, although he denied using it in the 2-year period prior to this presentation.
After his LVEF depreciated to 10%–15%, an implantable cardioverter defibrillator was implanted and a left ventricular assist device placed as a bridge to eventual orthotopic heart transplantation which took place 5 months after his initial presentation.
His family history was not notable for heart disease, myopathy, hepatic dysfunction, developmental delays, neurodegenerative disease or any known genetic conditions (figure 1).
The proband’s parents were from the same town in Mexico, but consanguinity was denied.
We present an 18-year-old young woman, born from an incestuous relation, with prior history of oligophrenia, alopecia and bilateral hearing impairment.
Patient was otherwise healthy until her menarche when she began experiencing acute inflammatory pain on the hip area during the premenstrual period, with progressive increase in volume and rigidity of both hips.
She presented with a waddling gait, limited and painful mobility of both hips (0-0-75°) with hard and prominent bilateral masses (figure 1).
There were no records of any traumatic events.
Plain pelvic radiography (figure 2) and CT scan (figure 3) showed exuberant soft tissues calcifications, enveloping both hips and thighs.
There was no involvement of the surrounding skeleton, and no other anomalous tissue was found on the calcifications location.
Patient was otherwise fit, with no recent history of weight loss, fever or other systemic signs of illness.
A 66-year-old woman with a known history of HME came to our clinic.
The patient presented a familiar history of HME without complications.
She complained of pain in the right thigh that started about 20 days earlier and had been progressively worsening.
She reported surgical treatment for leg lengthening.
She denied any recent trauma or injury to the area.
On clinical examination, the patient presented difficulty walking with a limp due to dysmetria of the lower limbs (right longer than left) and joint deformities.
The right thigh presented a noticeable enlargement compared to the contralateral side because of a voluminous mass extending anteroposteriorly from the inner root until the third middle.
On palpation, both a softer and a harder component were perceived, with the first detected in the lower portion, where the patient reported pain on acupressure, and the second in the posterosuperior portion (Fig.
1).
Ultrasound (US) examination was performed in orthostasis and revealed the presence of a heterogeneous mass with multiple calcified and fluid components not recognizable as intra or extra-lesional.
Doppler application did not show intralesional increased vascularity (Fig.
2).
The leg X-ray revealed the presence of a prominent exostosis away from the femoral neck.
The origin was localized in the metaphysis reaching the epiphysis of the proximal femur.
The lesion presented irregular margins and a cauliflower morphology.
The surrounding soft tissues appeared edematous.
The homolateral knee included in the study showed another prominent exostosis away from the proximal epiphysis of the tibia, on the lateral side (Fig.
3).
A 27-year old male with disproportionate short stature complained of bilateral lower limb pain and difficulty walking around for a month.
An orthopedic physician referred him to the Endocrine Unit of the Internal Medicine in early 2021.
A thorough history was taken related to his condition, sociodemographic status, family history, medical history (during childhood and adulthood), surgical history, and drug/medication history.
His condition started with paresthesia in both lower limbs in the last six months, progressing gradually with pain in both thighs and shins.
The pain was mild, and then the pain and paranesthesia became severe over time.
After one month, he started to have nodular swelling and pain in both thighs and shins.
The pain was more on the left lower limb affecting his daily activity.
Progressively over a month, he became disabled and could not move around without help.
He had a waddling gate, deformity with signs of stress fracture and union of both upper and lower extremities on radiograph and physical examination with coronal deformity.
There was no hypotonia with normal reflexes and range of motion of all joints in the upper and lower extremities.
Bilateral bowing of both femurs with a normal range of motion in both hips and knee joints was also observed.
The left knee was valgus about 20° while the right knee was varus about 12° ([Fig.
1]).
Also, he had a windswept deformity, which supports the metabolic cause of dwarfism.
There was no pain/tenderness in the chest with no signs of fracture or united fractures.
Examination of the oral cavity, showing poor oral hygiene, dental carries, missing of several teeth, gingivitis, and de-papillated tongue ([Fig.
2])
A 49 year-old woman was referred to endocrinology clinic by sports medicine specialist to rule an underlying metabolic bone disease given multiple recurrent stress fractures.
The patient was in her usual state of health until about 2 years prior to presentation when she had a metatarsal stress fracture while running.
She had been an avid runner for about 5 years prior to that.
Her stress fracture was attributed to high-volume running.
However, over the next 24 months, she had six other stress fractures, including multiple metatarsal stress fractures, a left proximal femoral shaft stress fracture (with periosteal oedema) and a rib fracture, all associated with minimal to no trauma.
The time of healing varied and depended on the location and severity of the fractures but ranged between 8 and 12 weeks.
In all instances, the patient kept a close follow-up with the sports medicine specialist and physical therapist and followed a return to run protocol based on their recommendations.
The patient denies having major dental problems, although she did report having numerous cavities as a child.
She has never had kidney stones.
She denied exposure to steroids.
She had regular menstrual cycles.
Patient’s past medical history was positive for anxiety, treated with buspirone.
She had no pertinent surgical history.
She was not taking any over-the-counter supplements.
Family history was negative for bone disorders, but she did report that her son has had major dental problems since childhood.
She was a former smoker, having quit smoking at age 42.
On examination, her vital signs were within normal limits.
Her body mass index was 23.
82 kg/m2.
General examination was unremarkable.
Oral examination showed no evidence of dental abnormalities, although she had a number of treated cavities with fillings.
She did not report any premature tooth loss.
Thyroid examination was unremarkable.
She did not have any bone or joint deformities or tenderness and did not exhibit muscle weakness.
Physical examination was negative for a moon facies, buffalo hump, cervical fullness or purple striae.
A 14 year old male patient presented to our endocrine outpatient clinic primarily with complaints of short stature.
The patient gave history of episodes of seizures a week prior to being seen in our outpatient department and had been admitted to a local hospital for the treatment.
On biochemical evaluation the cause for the seizures was discerned to be due to hypocalcaemia.
He was treated with I.
V calcium and referred to us for further evaluation.
Chvostek’s and Trousseau’s sign were both positive.
He was a product of non-consanguineous marriage with a normal birth and developmental history.
On further enquiry, his past medical history revealed that he was hypothyroid since the age of 2 and is replaced with 50 µg of thyroxine.
On taking the family history, we found that the patient is the younger of two siblings and we identified that his elder sister 18 years of age is of normal height and weight for her age and is medically normal.
However, we found on examination that his mother had a short 4th toe on her left foot.
On physical examination, the boy weighed 57 kg, measured 141 cm in height and at Tanner stage-4 of puberty corresponding to 12.
5–14 years.
He had a round face, short stubby fingers, depressed 4th knuckle on both hands (Fig.
1a) and brachymetatarsia of the 3rd & 4th toes on both feet (Fig.
1b).
Café au lait spots were noted on his back and right side of his thigh.
His penile length was 6 cm (normal 10 cm), testicular volume: is 12 ml bilaterally (normal—12–20 ml).
X-rays of both the upper limbs, lower limbs and skull were taken.
Roentgenogram pictures of limbs revealed bilateral short metacarpals (Fig.
2a) and short 3rd, 4th, 5th (Fig.
2b) metatarsals.
Lateral view of skull radiograph showed thickened calvarium and an open bite (Fig.
2c).
Mothers radiograph of left foot also showed short 4th metatarsal (Fig.
Bone mineral density examination showed a generalized osteopenia.
Nuclear imaging confirmed presence of a severe degree of osteoporosis (Fig.
4).
His baseline endocrine and biochemical values are shown in Table 1.
All routine biochemical parameters are analyzed on Roche fully automated biochemistry analyzer c311 with dedicated reagents.
All hormonal analysis is done by ECLIA on Roche e411 except for DHEAS, IGF-1 and Growth Hormone which were analyzed by ECLIA on Immulite 2000 (Seimens fully automated Immunoassay analyzer).
A 16-year-old Caucasian male patient with HS diagnosed in infancy presented to our emergency department with chest pain.
He reported a 4-day history of left-sided chest pain radiating to his shoulder tip with associated lethargy.
He had already started a course of clarithromycin prescribed by the general practitioner for a presumed lower respiratory tract infection.
There was no other significant medical history and no previous hospital admissions with complications of HS.
The patient was fully immunised, except for the pneumococcal vaccination which was not part of the childhood vaccination schedule during the patient's infancy.
There was a strong family history of HS
his grandfather, mother and sister were all affected by HS.
On presentation, he had a low-grade fever and was mildly tachycardic, but oxygen saturations were 97% in room air.
On examination there were no signs of respiratory distress and he was pale, but not visibly icteric.
He had a tender palpable spleen measuring 8 cm from the costal edge.
Initial blood tests revealed significant anaemia (haemoglobin 56 g/L) and a serum bilirubin of 52 µmol/L.
He had a positive antiglobulin test with cold agglutinin disease.
The chest X-ray did not show any lobar consolidation, but the abdominal ultrasound scan showed a spleen measuring up to 20 cm with a small established infarct near the inferior pole and a more acute infarct in the mid-pole region.
An otherwise healthy 52-year-old man presented to his local hospital with non-specific abdominal pain in the absence of any other symptoms.
He had previously undergone laparoscopic cholecystectomy for cholelithiasis, but his medical history was otherwise unremarkable.
He was not on any regular medication, and had no family history of note and no known allergies.
The patient had never smoked and reported a weekly alcohol consumption of 15 UK units.
Physical examination of all major systems was unremarkable.
Despite the absence of clinical signs, general blood tests revealed an abnormal liver biochemistry profile, which prompted imaging studies.
MR Cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) demonstrated left hydronephrosis, and CT of the abdomen and pelvis showed inflammatory changes within the pancreatic tail, in proximity to the left kidney and in association with localised lymphadenopathy.
A subsequent CT-guided biopsy established the diagnosis of a retroperitoneal de-differentiated liposarcoma, for which the patient was referred to the regional Sarcoma Service.
The patient underwent an uneventful 5½ h operation under general anaesthesia for tumour resection via laparotomy.
Owing to the tumour's anatomical relationships, the resection involved distal pancreatectomy, splenectomy, left nephrectomy, left hemicolectomy and, finally, local resection of the left hemidiaphragm.
Furthermore, a right-iliac-fossa colostomy was formed and a left-sided chest drain was inserted, as well as a left-upper-quadrant abdominal drain.
Postoperative imaging revealed moderate bilateral pleural effusions with bibasal atelectasis, and a left diaphragmatic hernia with small bowel herniation and obstruction.
On the seventh postoperative day, the patient was taken back to theatre, where the herniated bowel was reduced.
Thereafter, he remained in the ward to recover.
Despite an otherwise stable and satisfactory recovery, an incidental and asymptomatic hyperkalaemia at 5.
7 mmol/L was noted on the 11th postoperative day.
ECG was initially performed to exclude arrhythmia and conduction abnormalities.
As this demonstrated normal sinus rhythm in the absence of any characteristic hyperkalaemic changes, blood tests were repeated for confirmation.
Over the next 3 days, potassium levels fluctuated between 5.
3 and 5.
9 mmol/L, alongside serum sodium levels of 130–132 mmol/L, creatinine levels of 95–102 μmol/L, normal urea levels and high, yet steadily decreasing, inflammatory markers.
At a peak potassium value of 6.
6 mmol/L on the 15th postoperative day, supplementary investigations were carried out to exclude various causes of persistent hyperkalaemia.
These included paired urine-serum osmolalities (714 and 281 mOsm/L respectively), urinary sodium (203 mmol/L), fT4 (13.
5 pmol/L), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) (4.
82 munit/L), early morning cortisol levels (569 nmol/L) and bicarbonate (21 mEq/L).
A 28-year-old man presented with a history of intermittent haematuria over the past 10 years.
At the age of 18, he developed haematuria during an episode of enteric fever that persisted for 6–8 weeks after the fever subsided.
He required repeated transfusions during the episode and as per the available record direct and indirect Coombs tests were positive and a diagnosis of autoimmune haemolytic anaemia was made by the treating physician on the basis of splenomegaly and positive Coombs test and steroids in the form of prednisolone were started at a dose of 1 mg/kg.
The patient took treatment for 4 weeks and as haematuria did not subside and development of steroid facies, he defaulted on treatment.
The patient improved spontaneously and did not follow-up.
The patient continued to intermittently have haematuria and would go to local doctors and received blood transfusions for it.
His episodes initially were associated with fever and would usually last for 2–3 weeks on average.
But subsequently the episodes occurred spontaneously even without fever.
Another evaluation performed elsewhere some years previously showed only indirect Coombs being positive and direct being negative.
When he presented to our hospital the patient's main symptoms were tiredness, passing dark coloured urine for the past 1 week and slight icterus of eyes, as noticed by his brother.
There was no history of fever so no medications were taken for it.
There was no family history of any similar disorder or any history suggestive of haemolytic anaemia.
Urine output was normal and there was no history of chest pain, difficulty in swallowing or early satiety.
Investigations revealed a haemoglobin level of 5.
4 g/dL, total leucocyte count 2000 cells/µL and platelet count 60 000/µL.
He had an uncorrected reticulocyte count of 20.
4% and serum lactate dehydrogenase level was elevated.
Bone marrow showed a hypercellular marrow with erythroid-to-myeloid ratio of 5:1 and no iron stores (figure 1).
Serum B12 levels were normal and urine was positive for haemosiderin in three separate samples.
Antinuclear antibodies were negative and a Donath-Landsteiner (DL) antibodies test was negative ruling out paroxysmal cold haemoglobinuria (PCH).
Ultrasound abdomen was performed which showed mild splenomegaly with normal-sized liver.
There was absence of IgM agglutinins in his blood and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (G6PD) levels were normal.
Ham's test could not be performed in absence of suitable control and flow cytometry was ordered for CD55 and CD59 antigens which showed a partial deficiency of CD59 antigen consistent with a diagnosis of type II PNH (figure 2).
A 54-year-old woman followed up with GD since 1998 was referred to the outpatient clinic with symptoms of limping, low back and the right hip joint pain.
She had been visited the doctor in another clinic 6 months ago with similar symptoms.
At this visit, a right-hip fracture was detected and operation was planned for the fracture.
But she did not accept to undergo any operation.
In her history, she had applied to hospital with epistaxis and abdominal pain.
Because she had massive splenomegaly, bone marrow biopsy had been performed and Gaucher cells had been showed.
Than molecular genetic evaluation had determined N370S mutation and finally the patient had been diagnosed with type 1 GD in 1998 but she had not take any treatment since that time.
She had attacks of quick bruising and occasional epistaxis during this time.
She had two brothers with GD.
She went to the previous clinic because of increased symptoms.
Surgery was planned again, but she could not be operated due to low blood values.
Then she was referred to our hospital.
The results of the laboratory tests were leucocytes 3000/mm3, haemoglobin 9.
6 g/dL and platelets 26 000/mm3.
Folat 7.
67 ng/mL, vitamin B12 1044 pg/mL, Ferritin 377 ng/mL.
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate of, C reactive protein, liver enzyme levels and tests those show the normal kidney function tests.
Biochemical bone markers were calcium 9.
6 mg/dL (normal range 8.
6–10.
2 mg/dL), phosphorus 4.
24 mg/dL (normal range 2.
3–4.
7 mg/dL), alkaline phosphatase 2110 U/I (normal range 35–129 U/I), parathyroid hormone 3396 pg/mL (normal range 9.
5–75 pg/mL), 25(OH) vitamin D 19.
2 ng/mL (normal range 20–120).
Bone mineral densitometry revealed osteoporosis (T-score 3.
The patient’s X-ray (figure 1) and MRI of the hip (figure 2A,B) demostrated a femoral neck fracture with surrounding areas of avascular necrosis (figures 1 and 2).
In the right femur geographic contours of medullary bone infarcts, high signal on T2-weighted and low signal in T1-weighted images could be seen in proksimal femoral head, neck, intertrochanteric region as well as proksimal shaft.
There was no bone marrow oedema propably due to the late phase of fracture.
The medullary of all bones also revealed abnormal T1-weighted and T2-weighted intermediate signals indicating red bone marrow infiltration.
Orthopaedics department suggested surgery for fracture but asked for the correction of the blood values.
Although the patient was given two units of erythrocyte suspension and three units of apheresis platelet before the operation, the patient’s platelet counts only reached to 39 000/mm.
We talked with the patient and explained the risks of surgery.
Surgery was planned after correction of blood values with enzyme (imiglucerase) treatment because she did not admit any operation.
She has been visited our internal medicine department for the past 6 months and received the enzyme treatment once in a month.
Her number of platelets has reached to 87 000/mm.
Control plain film of pelvis revealed partial union of the femur neck fracture after 6 months.
Her right hip was no longer aching but she was walking slightly lame.
A 45-year-old man came to our hospital for a routine health examination and had an unexpectedly low HbA1c concentration of 3.
9%.
The results of fasting blood glucose and glycated albumin were normal.
The chromatogram showed no abnormalities, thus excluding interference from hemoglobin variants.
The blood routine results indicated a decrease in the number of red blood cells and hemoglobin concentration and an increase in reticulocyte count.
Biochemical examination indicated a slight increase in direct bilirubin (Table 1).
Mild hemolysis was present in the serum.
These results supported the presence of hemolytic anemia in patients.
The blood smear result indicated that the patient had an increase in oval-shaped red blood cells with varying cell sizes.
Teardrops, fragments, and rod-shaped red blood cells were visible (Figure 1).
In addition, the patient’s Coombs test was negative.
The proband was a 12-years-old girl presenting with chronic compensated hemolysis, Gilbert syndrome, and recurrent abdominal pain.
The blood count showed: hemoglobin 13 g/dL, red blood cell counts 4.
020.
000/mm3, Mean Corpuscular Volume (MCV) 90.
3 fL, Mean Content Hemoglobin (MCH) 32.
1 pg, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) 38.
3 g/dL, reticulocytosis, and indirect hyperbilirubinemia.
The complete blood work-up is shown in Table 1.
The ultrasound of the abdomen did not show gallstones, hepatomegaly and splenomegaly.
The patient was a single-born from non-consanguineous Italian parents (Fig.
1a).
The remote case history reported neonatal jaundice treated with phototherapy.
The family anamnesis revealed that the father presented jaundice during his childhood, recurrent episodes of abdominal pain resolved after splenectomy (performed at the age of 23 years-old) and gallstones for which he had undergone a cholecystectomy.
The paternal uncle also had gallbladder stones.
To investigate the cause of hemolysis in our patient, laboratory investigations were carried out.
The peripheral blood smear showed anisocytosis with the presence of red blood cells with specific shape: stomatocytes (5%), ovalocytes (4%), schistocytes (3%) and rare spherocytes (Fig.
The direct antiglobulin test (DAT) was negative, thus excluding an autoimmune origin of the hemolysis.
Structural hemoglobin alterations have also been excluded performing electrophoresis and molecular assessment of the genes encoding beta and alpha-globin chains.
The activity of red blood cell metabolism enzymes (Hexokinase, Glucose-6-phosphate isomerase, 6-Phosphofruttochinase, Glyceraldehyde phosphate dehydrogenase, Phosphoglycerate kinase, Pyruvate kinase, Glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase, Adenylate 6-Phosphogluconate dehydrogenase kinase) was normal.
The family history showed an autosomal dominant inheritance of the condition.
To investigate the possible presence of a spherocytosis condition, the most frequent erythrocyte structural defect, a combination of tests was performed.
First, the eosin-5′-maleimide binding test (EMA test), a cytometric analysis in which a fluoresceinated (eosin-5′-maleimide) substance binds to the plasma membrane proteins of red blood cells, mainly to the band 3 protein [1, 9].
The average fluorescence of RBCs with EMA staining in patients with spherocytosis is lower than that of control RBCs due to the decrease in the number of target proteins.
In our case, this examination was in the normal range with a value of 12% (normal test value> 11%).
The other complementary investigations carried out were the osmotic resistance tests such as the glycerol lysis test (AGLT50) and the Pink test.
These tests were normal in our patient.
Furthermore, quantitative analysis of membrane proteins was carried out using Sodium Dodecyl Sulphate-PolyAcrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), and resulted not altered.
We also performed the ektacytometry that evaluates the erythrocyte deformability by subjecting them to an increasing osmotic gradient with constant shear stress [12].
Ektacytometry showed a left shift of the osmolarity curve suggestive of DHS.
In agreement with the clinical suspicion, genetic testing was carried out both in the patient and in the parents by a targeted-NGS custom panel composed of 86 causative genes of hereditary anemias.
This panel is an updated version of a similar previously published one [15].
We found in both subjects the missense variant c.
1815G > A, p.
Met605Ile in PIEZO1 gene (NM_001142864, CCDS54058) in heterozygous state.
According to the guidelines of American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG), we evaluated the pathogenicity of this variant by gathering evidence from various sources: population data, computational and predictive data, functional data, and segregation data [16].
First, the variant segregated in the affected father (Fig.
Currently, this variant is annotated neither in population databases nor in databases of known variant.
Moreover, it is predicted by several tools as probably damaging (MutationTaster score 0.
999 Disease causing
FATHMM Score − 1.
59
LRT prediction Deleterious
PolyPhen2 score HumVar 0.
968 Probably damaging
PROVEAN Score-2.
95 Damaging).
A 39-year-old woman from Bam, Kerman, Iran with ovarian cancer was a candidate of blood transfusion due to anemia.
She had a history of severe chronic hemolytic anemia, Hb levels as low as 5.
5 g/dl with unknown etiology, and blood transfusion in her was followed by fever, chills, and hemolysis.
Her blood was previously typed (back type method) as O, Rh (D) positive (CinnaGen Inc.
, Tehran, Iran) with incompatible crossmatch (3+ reaction) with all the blood units in hospital.
Looking for compatible blood for this patient, her blood sample was referred to Kerman Blood Transfusion Center for identification of antibody.
The results of antibody screening (Immucor, Norcross, GA, USA) direct Coombs test, and antibody identification (Immucor, Norcross, GA, USA) tests indicated the presence of allo- and auto-antibodies in patient’s serum, which were not reliable due to autoantibody interference.
After a period of immunosuppressive therapy (4 months), the mentioned tests were repeated.
Following a 3-cell antibody screening test, the presence of allo-antibodies in patient’s serum was detected.
Antibody identification test was done using eleven panels of red cells to identify the type of antibody.
3+ reaction at the cells positive for Rh antigens (except for D) showed that specific antibodies for E, e, C, and c antigens were present.
Based on RBC phenotyping test, the patient red cells were typed as D+, C-, c-, E-, e -, K-, Fya-, Fyb-, M+, N-, S+, s+, Jka+.
All the above tests were performed in duplicate for confirmation of results.
Patient’s family members were invited for phenotypic evaluation.
It was found that her two brothers had the same red cell phenotype as the patient.
Patient and family’s phenotypes and the most possible genotype of the individuals (according to phenotype and race) were shown in Table 1.
In September 2017, a 19-year-old girl, of Asian Indian ancestry, without any significant medical history, presented with high grade fever of 10 days duration, accompanied by malaise, anorexia and arthralgia.
On third day of fever, she developed a reddish, pruritic rash over abdomen, back, forearm, palms and tips of fingers and front of thighs.
Her mother also noted swelling on both sides of throat with reddening and watering of eyes without complaints of photophobia.
The patient noted difficulty in swallowing both solids and liquids with pain in throat.
After 5 days of onset of rash, she noted that it began to fade and that the skin ‘peeled off’.
There was no history of headache, altered sensorium, rhinorrhoea, cough, pain abdomen, dysuria, yellowish discolouration of eyes or urine or bleeding manifestations.
On examination, higher mental functions were intact and there were no meningeal signs.
She was febrile with a high pulse rate (110 beats/min, regular) and normotensive.
Respiratory rate was increased (24 breaths/min) and pallor was noted on general survey.
Ocular examination was significant for the presence of bilateral conjunctival injection.
There was periungual peeling of skin, with desquamated macular rash over front of torso and back, forearms and thighs (figure 1).
Her tongue was fissured and erythematous with the presence of reddish-white spots over its dorsum (figure 2).
No definite nail changes were noted.
Palpation around neck revealed non-tender cervical lymphadenopathy of size 2 cm.
Abdominal examination did not reveal any organomegaly.
Breath sounds were equally heard on both sides of chest and cardiac examination was uneventful except for the presence of a loud first heart sound (S1).
A 65-year-old man with a medical history of rheumatic fever in childhood reported thoracic pain while at work and collapsed.
He died in the ambulance on the way to hospital due to ventricular fibrillation.
After the few episodes of rheumatic fever with subsequent pancarditis in childhood, the patient suffered from recurrent arrhythmias throughout his life and received medical treatment including β blockers and diuretics in the past few years due to slowly progressive heart failure.
At autopsy, the heart showed signs of rheumatic heart disease with left ventricular dilation, eccentric left ventricular hypertrophy, posteromedial papillary muscle hypertrophy, and thickening and fusion of the chordae tendineae of the mitral valve (figures 1 and 2
in comparison, a heart with regular chordae tendineae in figure 3).
Chordae tendineae of the anterolateral papillary muscle measured up to 1.
2 cm in length and 1.
1 cm in diameter (figure 4)
chordae tendineae of the posteromedial papillary muscle measured up to 2 cm in length and 6 mm in diameter.
Histopathological analysis of the heart revealed extensive tendon fibrosis and sclerosis of the chordae tendineae without inflammation, small fibrous scars in the left and right ventricle and pericardial fibrosis, as evidence of prior myocarditis and pericarditis.
At the time of death, no inflammatory infiltrates in atria, ventricles and heart valves were found.
An 84-year-old man was admitted to our Department of Internal Medicine for exertional dyspnea.
His medical history showed he had been diagnosed with hypertensive cardiomyopathy with heart failure a few years before admission and a permanent pacemaker had also been implanted after a syncope.
During physical examination his general condition was discrete.
The patient was alert, cooperative and eupneic at rest.
His blood pressure was 115/60 mm Hg, pulse rate was 68 beats/min, and respiratory rate was 12 breaths/min.
Oxygen saturation was 95% in room air.
Cardiac tones were attenuated without murmurs, and basal crackles were present in both lungs.
Laboratory tests showed raised troponin (0.
056 ng/mL, vn <0.
015) and NTproBNP (2627 pg/mL
vn <450) levels.
ECG showed sinus rhythm, 1st degree A-V block and left ventricle hypertrophy.
Chest X-ray was not significant.
Echocardiography showed severe left ventricular concentric hypertrophy with sparkling myocardium, mildly reduced ejection fraction with severe diastolic dysfunction (restrictive pattern), biatrial dilatation and severe aortic stenosis (AVA 0.
6 cm2, 0.
38 cm2/m2) with a low transvalvular gradient due to the reduced stroke volume secondary to left ventricle hypertrophy (paradoxical ’low-flow low-gradient').
Dobutamine stress echocardiography was not performed.
A 22-year-old man presented to our clinic with exertional dyspnoea of New York Heart Association (NYHA) class-I for the past 6 months.
He was born of a non-consanguineous marriage and was first in birth order.
The second sibling died of congenital heart disease with heart failure (certified by a paediatrician) at the age of 1 month.
However, other details were not available.
The other siblings were surviving uneventfully so far.
The patient had normal growth except for delay in mentation.
He had poor scholastic performance as well.
He had characteristic dysmorphic features, which included triangular facies, ptosis, epicanthal folds, low set ears, low hair line, webbed neck, widely spaced nipples and syndactyly of toes.
His height (168 cm) was appropriate for his age.
He had underdeveloped and undescended testes for which he underwent bilateral orchidectomy in childhood, but the secondary sexual characters developed normally.
Genotyping showed normal male (XY) karyotype.
Case 1: a female newborn was delivered at 38 weeks’ gestation.
Pregnancy and labour were uneventful.
The newborn was evaluated on day 1 of life for asymptomatic sinus bradycardia observed in the nursery.
ECG recording showed a prolonged QT interval (QTc of 555 ms) and was otherwise normal (figure 1).
The newborn had a short period of supraventricular tachycardia during the first week of life with spontaneous resolution.
Oral propranolol was initiated and titrated to 3 mg/kg/day.
Otoacoustic emissions excluded neurosensorial deafness.
Genetic testing revealed an heterozygous variant in the KCNH2 gene NM_000238.
4: c.
772C>T, p.
(Pro241Leu) in exon 4 which has been reported in individuals with LQTS.
First-degree relatives were asymptomatic and had normal QTc on ECG recording.
Their genetic testing is underway.
Case 2: a male newborn was delivered at 33 weeks of gestation.
Fetal bradycardia was identified during week 22 of gestation.
On week 25 the fetus had a heart rate of 80 beats per minute with second-degree AV block.
Regular monitoring of the fetus showed no signs of heart failure.
He was born by caesarean section and birth weight was 1575 g.
Heart rate was 120–145 beats per minute after birth.
The newborn was admitted to the neonatal unit and ECG recordings documented prolonged QTc interval (550–650 ms) with 2:1 AV block and T wave alternans (figure 2).
During the first month of life he remained in sinus rhythm with occasional ventricular extrasystolic beats.
After the first month, he had recurrent episodes of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) and polymorphic VT (torsade de pointes type at 300 beats per minute) with short duration and spontaneous resolution.
He was started on propranolol with gradual dose increase, but, due to a low heart rate while still having arrhythmic events, an epicardial pacemaker was implanted and programmed as VVI mode (ventricular demand pacing).
Rescue HR of 70 beats per minute, allowed propranolol titration to 4 mg/kg/day and control of arrhythmias.
Two heterozygous variants in SCN5A gene NM_198056.
2: c.
5315T>G, p.
(Leuc1772Arg) and c.
393–5C>T were identified by genetic testing.
The first variant has not been reported in previous studies and is localised in a functional domain where several other variants causing LQTS have been described.
The second variant is rare but has also been reported previously as a pathogenic variant in patients with arrhythmia.
Parents were asymptomatic and had normal QTc on ECG recording.
Despite proper information regarding disease severity, parents refused genetic testing and have missed several appointments.
A 45-year-old previously healthy man presented to our hospital with first episode of palpitations associated with dizziness.
These symptoms were followed by severe central chest pain which prompted his visit to the emergency room.
The patient denied any recent constitutional symptoms.
He does not take any prescribed or over the counter medications.
Review of systems, medical, surgical and family history was unremarkable.
He was physically active, and works in a local grocery store.
There is no history of tobacco, alcohol or illicit drug use.
Physical examination in the emergency room revealed a well built man, in mild distress.
Core body temperature was 38°C and respiratory rate 18 breaths/min.
His blood pressure was 150/90 mm Hg and heart rate 90 bpm.
His general physical, cardiac and rest of the clinical examination were normal.
Baseline laboratory investigations including serum electrolytes, lipid profile, complete blood count, liver and kidney function tests were normal.
His chest X-ray was unremarkable.
Echocardiogram showed chambers with normal size and function.
The pericardium, the valves and other cardiac structures were normal.
Cardiac biomarkers followed a typical myocardial infarction pattern with rapid rise and fall of troponin I and creatine kinase (figure 1).
Presentation troponin I and CK-MB of 0.
72 and 12.
2 mg/dL peaked at 9.
3 and 50.
6 mg/dL, respectively within 24 h prior to declining.
Cardiac catheterisation showed angiographically normal coronaries.
Our patient is a woman in her 20s with a diagnosis of CPVT.
This was diagnosed following a survived cardiac arrest at the age of 6, and she was found on genetic testing to possess the RYR2 mutation characteristic of CPVT1.
She has a dual chamber implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) in situ and has had appropriate shocks for episodes of ventricular tachycardia (VT) and ventricular fibrillation (VF
see figure 1).
Her heart is structurally normal with good left ventricular function.
Unfortunately, she has also been troubled with episodes of AF with high ventricular rates which are not only highly symptomatic (with presyncope and breathlessness) but have also led to inappropriate shocks, despite medical therapy including oral nadolol 120 mg once daily and oral flecainide 100 mg three times a day (see figure 2).
34-year-old non-smoking African–American female who presented to the clinic with progressive shortness of breath (Figure 1).
CAT scan chest showed multiple well-defined thin-walled bilateral lung cysts which are randomly distributed throughout the lungs with normal intervening lung parenchyma consistent with LAM.
There were no infiltrates, worrisome nodules, or pleural effusion.
A 3-year-old female child, born full term from uncomplicated pregnancy, was referred for persistent right lung volume loss with mediastinal shift towards right on chest X-ray.
The parents reported that the child had experienced breathing difficulties from infancy.
The patient often required albuterol via nebuliser for wheezing
she was also using inhaled fluticasone with little improvement in her symptoms.
Neither parent smoked or described a family history of asthma or atopy.
The patient had a respiratory infection secondary to influenza during infancy, but she did not require hospitalisation at that time.
She was later admitted to the hospital when she was 2 years old for respiratory syncytial virus pneumonia and was found at that time to have right lung volume loss with mediastinal shift to the right on chest X-ray (figure 1).
After recovery, the parents of the child noticed that the patient had increased frequency of dry coughing episodes.
They also described respiratory distress on exertion with reduced exercise tolerance.
A follow-up chest radiograph at the age of 3 years showed similar findings of right lung volume loss with mediastinal shift, which prompted the referral to pulmonology (figure 2).
Prior to that, she had been evaluated at a different facility by a pulmonologist.
The appearance of dextrocardia on imaging with a few episodes of otitis media had raised a concern for PCD.
However, the work-up was not done for PCD as the patient was lost to follow-up.
On presentation to the clinic, the patient had vital signs within normal limits and was in no respiratory distress.
She had symmetric chest movement with good air exchange.
No wheezing, rhonchi or rales were observed.
Cardiovascular examination was normal.
No clubbing, cyanosis or oedema was noted.
On February 2013, a 24-year-old man was referred to the Outpatient clinic of Imam Khomeini Hospital of Tehran University of Medical Sciences, with a history of productive cough and rhinorrhea from 4 years ago.
He also reported blood-streaked sputum during the last 5 days.
The volume of the sputum was <50 ml per day.
The patient also had low-grade fever, fatigue and sweating.
He had undergone functional endoscopic sinus surgery for evaluation of the productive cough and rhinorrhea 2 years ago and bilateral paranasal sinusitis and polyps had been reported.
He also had a history of hospital admission about 7 years ago for the evaluation of recurrent abdominal pain
familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) was considered as probable diagnosis and Colchicine was prescribed.
He refused to use colchicine and the abdominal pain subsided spontaneously.
A review of his previous medical documents revealed cyanosis at the time of birth, sepsis 20 days after that and seizure attacks when he was 2 weeks old.
During infancy he underwent a gastro-esophageal reflux repair surgery.
His growth and development, physical activities at home and at school, learning in school and other activities did not show any significant difference from his other peers.
His parents were not relatives.
All five of his siblings were healthy.
Three of them were married with no history of infertility, and their children were also well.
Physical examination revealed a pulse rate of 88/min with regular rhythm
blood pressure 110/70 mmHg
respiratory rate 18/min
oral temperature 37.
8°C at the time of admission
weight 67 kg and height 171 cm.
Coarse crackles were heard on lungs auscultation and the examination of heart and abdomen were normal.
Examination for cyanosis, clubbing and edema were negative.
Complete blood count revealed Hb of 14.
1 g/dl, WBC 6400/µl and Plt of 322000/µl.
Blood sugar, urea, creatinine, electrolytes and liver function tests were all within normal ranges.
C-reactive protein of 152 mg/l (normal: 0–10), ESR: 50 mm/h.
Sputum culture and sensitivity was negative, including for Ziehl Neelsen.
RF, ANA, ANCA, anti-dsDNA, HBsAg, HCV Ab and HIV Ab were all negative.
Serum immunoelectrophoresis was normal.
Semen analysis showed azoospermia.
Urine analysis was normal.
ECG and ultrasonography of the abdomen were normal.
Spirometry revealed a mild obstructive pattern.
On chest X-ray, bilateral peribronchial thickening and suspicious bronchiectatic changes were evident.
A high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scan of the thorax revealed a bilateral scattered tree in bud pattern, peribronchial thickening and some bronchiectatic changes in the apex and middle zones (Fig.
A 38-year-old woman was referred to rapid access lung cancer clinic owing to recurrent lower respiratory tract infections and weight loss of greater than a stone over the past 6 months.
Of note, she was a smoker of 20-pack year.
There was no history of recent travel.
Her background history was non-contributory.
She was not on any medication.
On examination, she looked cachectic and her weight was around 48.
3 kg.
Her vitals were normal.
There was no evidence of clubbing, lymphadenopathy or hepatosplenomegaly.
Chest was clear on auscultation with reduced air-entry bilaterally.
Blood tests were normal, including inflammatory markers.
Chest x-ray (CXR) (figure 1) on admission showed multifocal infiltrates throughout both lungs.
This suggested either a peribronchial or endobronchial pattern of disease, or tuberculosis (TB), both of which needed to be excluded.
No osseous involvement was seen on skeletal radiograph.
The patient tested negative for both antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody and HIV.
The patient then underwent CT of chest, which showed that both lungs were diffusely abnormal.
CT brain was normal.
There were ill-defined pulmonary nodules measuring 8 mm with small cavitating lung lesions (figure 2).
A 37-year-old female patient initially presented to the emergency department with a history of central pleuritic chest pain and acute onset of shortness of breath.
She had also been experiencing coryzal symptoms and was expectorating some white sputum.
All her observations were stable, her oxygen saturations were 100% and she had no fever.
A full examination did not reveal any focal abnormalities.
She was treated at that time for a chest infection.
Of note she had a medical history of an atrial-septal defect repair 12 years previously.
As part of her investigations for infertility she had been found to have polycystic ovaries.
Two years prior to her presentation she had been treated for a skin tag near to her nipple, which was thought be a papilloma.
There was no history of exposure to pneumotoxins and she was a life-long non-smoker.
She was originally born in Pakistan but had lived in the UK from the age of 2 years.
A travel history demonstrated occasional visits to Pakistan.
Her family history only revealed her father and sister to have asthma.
A 62-year-old Caucasian man was admitted in November 2011 with increasing shortness of breath.
He had first started feeling unwell about 3–4 weeks prior to his admission with flu-like symptoms and shortness of breath.
He was given ciprofloxacin for a chest infection with no relief.
He was previously fit and well with no allergies and had never smoked.
He worked as a welder and some weeks prior to his illness had started work at a biofuel processing plant dealing with waste products from a brewery but had never worked with asbestos.
He denied ever having tuberculosis (TB) or being significantly exposed to birds.
His brother required a ‘triple heart bypass’ in his early 30s but there was otherwise no family history of note.
On admission he looked well and was sat upright and speaking comfortably.
Routine observations revealed a heart rate of 90 bpm, blood pressure 136/86 mm Hg, respiratory rate of 22 breaths/min, a temperature of 37°C and oxygen saturations were 93% on air.
On examination there was no clubbing or signs of cyanosis and chest auscultation was clear.
Jugular venous pulsations were not raised but cardiac auscultation revealed a pansystolic murmur loudest over the apex.
There were no signs of peripheral oedema.
A 40-year-old male patient presented to the emergency department with complaints of shortness of breath associated with bilateral pleuritic chest pain.
He denied any history of trauma and had smoked 40 cigarettes daily for the past 22 years.
On examination, the patient appeared breathless with a respiratory rate of 25 breaths/min and peripheral capillary oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 92% on room air.
Neck examination showed no tracheal deviation and chest examination identified decreased bilateral chest expansion with no intercostal retractions.
On chest palpation, there was a slightly diminished tactile fremitus on both sides.
Chest percussion revealed a hyper-resonant note heard over the right and left upper and mid zones.
On auscultation, there were no audible breath sounds and whispered voice sounds were abolished over the right and left upper and mid zones.
The gasometric evaluation revealed the presence of hypoxaemia and hypocapnia.
A posteroanterior chest radiograph showed a large bilateral pneumothorax (figure 1).
The thoracic CT scan revealed focal areas of emphysema and apical subpleural blebs, which were located predominantly in the peripheral regions of the apex (figure 2).
A 31-year-old man presented with a history of cough with mucoid expectoration, breathlessness and wheezing since childhood.
His symptoms were punctuated by recurrent episodes of exacerbations associated with an increase in cough, purulent expectoration, haemoptysis and breathlessness.
The patient also reported nasal stuffiness, nasal obstruction and epistaxis since childhood.
Auscultation of the chest revealed polyphonic wheeze associated with diffusely scattered coarse crackles.
Spirometry showed an obstructive pattern without bronchodilator reversibility.
Chest radiography revealed dextrocardia along with bronchiectasis.
Contrast-enhanced and high-resolution CT of the thorax revealed bronchiectasis (with mucus impaction) and situs inversus.
Sweat chloride was normal.
A possibility of primary ciliary dysfunction/Kartagener syndrome was considered.
Semen analysis revealed azoospermia.
Biopsy of tracheal mucosa was performed using flexible bronchoscopy.
Electron microscopic examination of the tracheal mucosa revealed ultrastructural defect in the respiratory cilia (absent dynein in the outer ring arm of the microtubule), thereby confirming the diagnosis of Kartagener syndrome.
Evaluation was performed for ABPA, and the diagnosis was confirmed on the basis of elevated total and A.
fumigatus-specific IgE, peripheral blood eosinophilia and immediate cutaneous hyper-reactivity against A.
fumigatus antigen.
CT of the paranasal sinuses was also conducted, which revealed only mucosal thickening with no clear suggestion of allergic fungal sinusitis
A 54-year-old male, non-smoker, non-alcoholic, known diabetic and hypertensive, presented with fever, dry cough, and progressive breathlessness for one month.
Initial evaluation in a different hospital confirmed hypoxia and PFT (pulmonary function tests) was suggestive of a restrictive pattern.
A CT chest demonstrated characteristic crazy-paving pattern.
Sputum for PAS was negative.
He was labeled as having interstitial lung disease and was discharged on oxygen and steroids.
His symptoms worsened gradually and he presented to our Institution on high flow oxygen and was found to be PaO2-42 on FIO2 of 1.
There was no history suggestive of a connective tissue disorder.
On examination, he had bilateral basal crepitations on the chest.
Patient was admitted in ICU, blood gases showed type I respiratory failure with a paO2 of 53 mm of Hg on FIO2 of 0.
6.
Rest of the routine investigations were normal.
The chest X-ray showed bilateral reticular shadows affecting the lower zones (left > right).
Bronchoscopy with lavage was done
the patient did not consent to lung biopsy.
BAL microbiology was negative.
After counseling, a repeat bronchoscopy with TBLB was done, which showed pulmonary alveolar proteinosis on histopathology (PAS stain was strongly positive).
A 35-year-old woman presented to the medical emergency department with low-grade fever for 3 weeks, vomiting for 1 week and anuria for 3 days.
She also reported dysuria and breathlessness for 1 week.
There was no history of decreased urine output, dialysis, effort intolerance, chest pain or palpitation, dyspnoea and weight loss.
Menstrual history was within normal limit but she reported gradually progressive loss of appetite.
Family history included smoky urine in her younger brother in his childhood, who died in an accident.
On general survey, the patient was conscious and alert.
She was dyspnoeic and febrile.
Severe pallor was present with mild pedal oedema.
Blood pressure was 180/100 mm Hg and pulse rate of 116/min regular.
No evidence of jaundice, clubbing cyanosis or lymphadenopathy was found.
Physical examination revealed bibasilar end-inspiratory crepitations in lungs and suprapubic tenderness.
There was no hepatosplenomegaly or ascites.
Cardiac examination was normal.
She was found to have severe bilateral hearing loss, which was gradually progressive for 5 years.
The fundi were bilaterally pale.
The patient was referred to the department of ophthalmology for a comprehensive eye examination.
Her visual acuity was documented as 6/18 in both eyes with no obvious lenticular opacity.
Slit-lamp examination showed bilateral anterior lentiglobus with posterior lenticonus.
Distant direct ophthalmoscopy revealed oil droplet sign (a suggestive confirmation of the presence of lenticonus)
and peripheral retina revealed multiple yellowish white lesion-like flecks in the mid-periphery, and few blot haemorrhages indicative of hypertensive changes.
Haemogram showed haemoglobin (Hb) 5.
7 g/dL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 15 mm in first hour, white cell count 17 200/µL with 82% polymorphs, adequate platelets and mean corpuscular volume 83.
3 fL.
Peripheral smear showed normocytic normochromic anaemia with mild anisocytosis.
Fasting sugar 78 mg/dL, blood urea 325 mg/dL, serum creatinine 11.
2 mg/dL and uric acid 8.
3 mg/dL.
Liver function tests were within normal limit as were serum electrolytes, except serum calcium (conc.
) 5.
8 mg/dL (adjusted with serum albumin).
Lipid profile and iron profile were also normal.
HIV and viral markers for HbsAg and hepatitis C virus were non-reactive.
ECG showed sinus tachycardia with features of left ventricular hypertrophy and chest X-ray posteroanterior view revealed cardiomegaly.
Urinalysis showed full field of pus cells with 35–40 RBCs/hpf and 3(+) proteinuria.
Urine samples for cultures were sent which reported pure growth of Escherichia coli.
Spot urine for protein:creatinine ratio was 2.
07 g/g Cr.
She underwent pure tone audiometry which revealed features suggestive of severe bilateral sensorineural hearing loss (SHNL).
Ultrasound of the abdomen showed bilateral contracted kidneys: right measured 6.
7×2.
3 cm and left 7.
8×3 cm, with increased cortical echogenecity and loss of corticomedullary differentiation, suggestive of medical renal disease.
Two-dimensional Echo reported dilated left ventricular cavity with mild mitral regurgitation and ejection fraction of 55%.
Renal and skin biopsies were conducted and specimens were sent for light and electron microscopy (EM).
Renal tissue on H&E stain was reported as focal segmental glomerulonephritis (FSGS).
Ultrathin sections of EM study of renal tissue revealed disruption of glomerular basement membrane (GBM) with diffuse thickening of glomerular capillary wall.
Dermal tissue depicted discontinuity of lamina densa with basket weaving pattern under EM.
A 64-year-old male presented to our hospital complaining of polyuria, polydipsia, generalized edema, frequent nocturia and postvoid dribbling.
His history included refractory hypertension for 7 years, though he was receiving multiple antihypertensive drugs, including Valsartan (320 mg), Atenolol (50 mg), amlodipine (10 mg), spironolactone (75 mg) and hydrochlorothiazide (75 mg).
He also had a history of intracranial haemorrhage with complete recovery.
His family history indicated a deceased cousin due to end-stage renal disease.
On examination, he had elevated blood pressure (180/90), a distended but soft abdomen and a liver edge palpable 2 cm below the costal ribs.
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) in addition to multiple cysts in both kidneys.
These findings were consistent with the ones in Multi-Slice Computerized Tomography (MSCT), in which three variable-sized cystic lesions were detected in both kidneys with a diameter of 32, 38 and 47 mm.
The MSCT also showed the AAA that measured 3.
6 cm, in addition to prostate hyperplasia.
Furthermore, thorax MSCT images showed multiple aneurysms larger than 22 mm arising from the left anterior descending (LAD) artery, the left circumflex and the right coronary artery.
On echocardiography, there was an eccentric left ventricle hypertrophy with an ejection fraction (EF) of 60%, while the electrocardiogram (ECG) uncovered a prominent left axis deviation.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the brain showed an increased size of the cerebral ventricles in addition to multiple hypertensive lesions of 2–24 mm on Fluid-Attenuated Inversion Recovery and T2-Weighted Image.
Laboratory tests revealed high levels of serum creatinine (6 mg/dl), urea (105 mg/dl), haemoglobin (9.
1 g/dl) and platelets count (187*103/dl).
Twenty-four hours urinalysis showed an additional massive proteinuria of 4200 mg/dl, in addition to a trace of red blood cells without cellular casts in microscopic examination.
The patient underwent a coronary catheterization in order to prepare him for renal transplantation, which clearly revealed ecstatic coronary arteries with multiple aneurysmal dilations in the three main coronary arteries.
A 2-year, 9-month-old boy born to non-consanguineous parents presented with acute dysentery for 5 days.
At the end of the fifth day, the dysentery settled, but he developed abdominal pain and anuria.
He was developmentally normal with nil significant antenatal and postnatal history.
Anthropometry revealed a weight of 10 kg and height of 90 cm.
He was found to have tachycardia with a heart rate of 140 beats/min, tachypnoea with a respiratory rate of 45 breaths/min and a blood pressure of 130/80 mm Hg (>99th percentile for his age and height).
He also had periorbital puffiness, pitting pedal oedema and ascites.
His sensorium was normal on admission.
Other systemic findings were not contributory.
His initial blood investigations showed reduced haemoglobin and platelets.
His peripheral smear showed thrombocytopenia with evidence of haemolysis in the form of schistocytes.
He also had deranged renal parameters and dyselectrolytaemia.
His lactate dehydrogenase and reticulocyte count were high.
His complement C3 level was low, but autoimmune work-up including complement C4 and direct Coombs test were negative.
Blood culture was sterile.
Urine routine revealed proteinuria and haematuria.
Stool culture for shiga toxin was not performed as it is not available in our region.
Ultrasound showed enlarged hyperechogenic kidneys.
A 3-year-old girl presented with increased thirst and frequency of micturition since 18 months of age.
Additionally, she suffered with poor growth since early infancy.
She did not have any other symptoms suggestive of a renal disorder, nor other systemic symptoms.
She was diagnosed as having primary hypothyroidism by an elevated thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) level of 10.
9 μIU/mL at 2 years of age and was subsequently commenced on levothyroxine replacement therapy.
She was first born to a third-degree consanguineous Muslim couple from Northern India, at term, with a low birth weight (2000 g) and with a smooth perinatal transition.
She achieved her developmental milestones at an appropriate age.
Physical examination was suggestive of stunting (height 75 cm, −6.
16 z score), wasting (weight 8 kg, −4.
86 z score) and microcephaly (head circumference 46 cm, <−3 z score).
Her vitals were stable at presentation, with normal haemodynamics.
Systemic examination was normal except for mild hepatomegaly, and no features of rickets were seen.
This toddler had a normal anion gap metabolic alkalosis, with hyponatraemia, hypokalaemia and hypochloremia.
There was increased urinary excretion of sodium, potassium (transtubular potassium gradient was elevated for the level of serum potassium), chloride and calcium (elevated urine calcium:creatinine ratio).
There was also increased protein excretion in urine.
Serum osmolality was normal and urine osmolality was low.
Mild elevation in serum TSH was noted despite levothyroxine replacement therapy (25 µg/day).
Renal and liver function tests were within normal limits.
Ultrasonography of the neck showed normal size and echotexture of bilateral thyroid lobes and renal ultrasound revealed mild hydronephrosis.
A 56-year-old man presented to us with a history of frothy urine and leg oedema for the last 6 months.
There was no history of fever, cough, shortness of breath and decrease urine output.
There is no significant past medical history.
No family member was suffering from similar illness.
On examination, bilateral pedal oedema was present, the spleen was palpable 2 cm below left costal margin, rest examination was unremarkable.
On further biochemical and haematological investigations, urine microscopy revealed significant proteinuria, a 24-hour urinary protein was 3.
1 g and serum creatinine was 2.
1 mg/dL.
Complete blood count revealed haemoglobin (Hb)—13.
0 g/dL, white cell count—28×109/L and platelet count of 842×109/L (table 1).
The peripheral blood smear was suggestive of the leucoerythroblastic picture with few tear drop cells.
Serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was raised (1142 IU/L).
To confirm the diagnosis of myeloproliferative disorders, bone marrow biopsy was done which was suggestive of PMF(figures 1 and 2).
Our patient was classified in intermediate risk-1 according to Dynamic International Prognostic Scoring System.
The patient was put on cytoreductive therapy with hydroxyurea (1000 mg/day).
Subsequently, the patient was referred to nephrology department to determine the cause of progressive renal dysfunction.
After 2 weeks, the patient presented in nephrology department with repeat urinalysis showing persistent nephrotic range proteinuria and serum creatinine of 2.
3 mg/dL.
Ultrasound abdomen was suggestive of the mild renal parenchymal disease.
Viral markers (HbsAg, antihepatitis C virus, HIV) were negative.
Serum electrophoresis study and antinuclear antibodies were negative (table 1).
Renal biopsy was performed to know the underlying cause of rapidly declining renal dysfunction and proteinuria.
Light microscopy section of kidney biopsy shows total 22 glomeruli out of which, 10 are globally sclerosed, 1 of the glomeruli shows ischaemic wrinkling and 2 of the glomeruli show segmental sclerosis (figure 3).
All the medium-sized vessels and arterioles show medial thickening and luminal narrowing with hyaline arteriosclerosis (figure 4).
A 50-year-old man presented to his local cardiology service with chest pain.
He was normotensive, with a history of dyslipidaemia but not other risk factors for coronary artery disease.
His ECG had left ventricular hypertrophy by voltage criteria and repolarisation abnormalities.
Echocardiography confirmed the presence of concentric LVH which was associated with diastolic dysfunction.
Coronary angiography revealed unobstructed coronary arteries and Holter monitoring non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT).
He had proteinuria with normal creatinine clearance.
He was found to have reduced plasma -galactosidase A activity (0.
6 nmol/h/ml, normal:4–21.
9 nmol/h/ml).
A 24-year-old Caucasian man presented to the emergency department with a week’s progressive swelling of his legs.
There was no recent infection or other relevant personal or family history of disease.
He was a smoker, was under no chronic medication and did not take any illicit drugs.
Previous routine laboratory results made 8 months before were available showing a serum creatinine of 87 µmol/L.
On physical examination, there was marked lower limbs oedema with no other findings.
The initial laboratory evaluation showed massive proteinuria (11 g on 24-hour urine collection), hypoalbuminaemia (20 g/L) and acute renal injury (Cr: 150 µmol/L).
Total and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol were normal (4.
8 mmol/L and 3.
00 mmol/L, respectively) and the triglycerides were moderately elevated (2.
3 mmol/L)
the C reactive protein was negative (<0 mg/dL).
Urine analysis was positive for proteinuria and haematuria, the urinary sediment showing many erythrocyte casts.
The chest radiograph obtained on admission was interpreted as within normal limits and the renal ultrasound scan showed no changes.
Additional investigations were performed including: antinuclear antibodies (positive, titre of 1/160—dense thin granular pattern), negative serology for hepatitis C virus and HIV and showing immunity for hepatitis B virus, negative extractable nuclear antigens and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ELISA test by Euroimmun for proteinase 3 and myeloperoxidase), negative anti-GBM antibodies (ELISA test by Euroimmun, specific for alpha-3 chain of type IV collagen isolated from bovine kidney), normal C3, C4 and CH50 levels, negative anticardiolipin antibodies and normal tumour markers.
Serum immunoglobulin analysis was significant for an IgG decrease
serum protein immunofixation was negative for the presence of a monoclonal component.
The urinary electrophoresis showed non-selective glomerular proteinuria.
A percutaneous renal biopsy of the left kidney was performed.
The light microscopy had 21 glomeruli for analysis.
Ten glomeruli had significant global sclerosis
the remaining glomeruli showed endocapillary and extracapillary proliferation with crescents present in about 30%
there was slight interstitial fibrosis and no vascular abnormalities.
The immunofluorescence (IF) fragment, with nine glomeruli, was analysed for IgG, IgA, IgM, C3, C4 and C1q.
All glomeruli showed intense IgG deposits (+++) in a linear parietal pattern
there were also C3 (+) and IgM (+) deposits with a focal and segmental parietal and granular mesangial pattern
it was not possible to stain for IgG subclasses or light chains nor was it possible to perform electron microscopy since these technics are not routinely available in our centre.
The patient was a 12-year-old boy who was the first child of non-consanguineous healthy parents.
His growth and development had been normal.
He had been followed at another hospital since the age of 3 years because of glycosuria and proteinuria of unknown cause.
At the first visit to our hospital, there were no specific physical findings.
Laboratory findings showed a low serum uric acid level (2 mg/dL), a high urinary β-2 microglobulin level (78,600 μg/L
normal < 250 μg/L), glycosuria (4+), proteinuria (urinary total protein/creatinine: 1.
08 [73 mg/dL/67.
1 mg/dL]), and aminoaciduria consistent with Fanconi syndrome.
Serum potassium and phosphate levels were within the lower normal limits.
Blood gas analysis showed a normal bicarbonate ion value.
His estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was 66.
8 mL/min/1.
73 m2.
Levels of serum copper ceruloplasmin, lactic acid, and pyruvic acid indicated that Wilson disease and mitochondrial disease were not the cause of Fanconi syndrome.
A recent slit-lamp examination showed cystine crystals in the cornea.
He had undergone an ophthalmological examination, including a slit-lamp examination, every 1 or 2 years because of seasonal pollen-allergic conjunctivitis until at least 2 years before referral to our hospital.
A cystine-binding protein assay showed a high free cystine content in granulocytes (6.
36 nmol half-cystine/mg protein, normal: <0.
15).
He was finally diagnosed with nephropathic juvenile cystinosis.
He had no signs of endocrine involvement, such as hypothyroidism, hypogonadism, or rickets.
A renal biopsy showed multinucleated podocytes, tubular atrophy, and interstitial fibrosis.
Cystine crystals were detected by electron microscopy.
These findings are consistent with cystinosis.
A 24-year-old male presented with > 4 years of repeated limb weakness and a relapse of 1 d.
Four years ago, the patient developed limb weakness and fatigue, especially in the lower limbs, which could be relieved spontaneously after rest.
He could walk and hold objects with both hands.
During the period without a specific diagnosis and treatment, the above symptoms occasionally occurred without aggravation but could be relieved spontaneously after rest.
One day ago, the patient was bitten by ants and showed weakness in the lower limbs.
His blood potassium level was 1.
66 mmol/L when examined in the Emergency Department.
Following oral and intravenous potassium supplementation and intravenous magnesium supplementation, his blood potassium was reexamined and was found to be 2.
22 mmol/L, and the patient was admitted to our department with hypokalemia.
Physical examination revealed a thin man, 156 cm in height, and 33.
5 kg in weight.
His temperature was 36.
5 ℃, respiratory rate was 20 breaths/min, and blood pressure was 116/53 mmHg with a regular heart rate of 100 bpm.
Thyroid palpation revealed that his thyroid was normal.
Chest auscultation revealed that his lungs were clear and heart sounds were normal.
Muscle strength of his left lower limb was grade 4, and that of the right lower and both upper limbs was grade 5.
We confirmed the persistence of a hypokalemic state secondary to renal potassium wasting, while serum potassium levels remained at approximately 1.
66–2.
83 mmol/L, and urinary potassium excretion was increased from 102.
43 to 120.
08 mmol/d.
Intriguingly, we observed hypomagnesemia (0.
4 mmol/L), hypocalciuria (1.
51-2.
46 mmol/d), and metabolic alkalosis (7.
47-7.
54).
Urinalysis did not show any alterations.
Serum creatinine and creatinine clearance were slightly higher than normal.
Glycosylated hemoglobin and plasma cortisol were within the normal range.
Echocardiography and renal ultrasound did not show any abnormalities.
Liver function, thyroid function, and other biochemical parameters were normal.
Secondary hyperreninemic hyperaldosteronism was detected in the supine and upright positions (PRA 6.
4 and 16.
45 ng/mL/h and aldosterone 330.
64 and 756.
82 pg/mL, respectively) Computed tomography revealed hyperplasia at the junction of the left adrenal gland and calcification of the diverticulum in the right renal pelvis.
Electrocardiography showed sinus rhythm and low T wave level.
The patient was diagnosed with hypokalemia, hypomagnesia, hypocalciuria, alkalosis, low serum chlorine, increased renin-angiotensin-aldosterone activity, normal blood calcium, and normal blood pressure.
A 15-year-old Chinese boy who had been experiencing headache and vomiting for 1 week was admitted to the hospital.
Ophthalmic examination did not reveal any obvious abnormalities, there were no neurological symptoms, and he did not exhibit short stature.
His clinical symptoms were sudden and severe, and mainly manifested as hypertension and severe kidney failure.
His blood pressure was 170/123 mmHg, his serum creatinine level was 1,026.
2 μmol/L, and no prior symptoms were reported.
His parents were consanguineous (first cousins), and his older brother had succumbed to an undiagnosed kidney disease at 8 years of age, without a kidney biopsy.
Ultrasonography depicted small kidneys and diffuse lesions (85–90 mm in diameter) in both kidneys, but no cystic enlargement of the kidneys.
Laboratory tests revealed a hemoglobin level of 67 g/L and a urinary protein level of 1.
05 g/24 h.
Chest computed tomography was normal.
Laboratory investigations on admission included screening for hepatitis B virus surface antigen, antinuclear antibodies, anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies, anti-glomerular basement membrane antibodies, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, all of which were negative.
The patient was started on hemodialysis.
Fortunately he received a kidney transplant after 2 months of dialysis.
He is currently recovering well, with a serum creatinine level of 117 μmol/L and an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 79.
6 ml/min/1.
73 mm2.
Laboratory results included urinary protein 1.
05 g/24 h, urine erythrocyte count 5/high-power field, serum creatinine 1,026.
2 μmol/L, and an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 5.
8 ml/min/1.
Extrarenal features mainly manifested as hypertension and moderate anemia.
An 8 yr old boy was referred to Pediatrics Neurologic Clinic Mashhad, Iran
due to developmental delay and seizure attacks from 6 yr ago.
He was the second child of non relative healthy parents
there was no evidence of seizure or mental retardation in his family.
He was born at term by a vaginal delivery with normal APGAR score and birth weight.
He had a history of neonatal icterus and phototherapy.
He had a happy face and the parents noticed developmental delay at 2 yr old.
He was admitted in a hospital because of tonic-colonic seizures and valproate sodium was administered for him.
He was able to walk independently at 4 yr old.
At the age of 6 yr, he was referred to Children Neurology Department in Mashhad due to hyperactivity, where received risperidone.
On physical examination, he had mandibular prognathism, strabismus and unusual laughing facial expression.
His head circumference was 51 cm.
His walking was unsteady, but muscles tone, force and deep tendon reflexes were normal.
Joints range of motion was normal.
Besides, he had speech disability and could walk independently, but could not run.
He had restricted communicative abilities and suffered from severe mental retardation.
Laboratory findings were normal.
Brain MRI and CBC test were normal.
Thyroid function test showed hypothyroidism, controlled by levothyroxine since 2 yr old.
In our patient, seizure attacks have been continued from the age of 2 yr, despite various pharmacologic treatments.
A 41-year-old medically retired nurse was admitted to hospital with a 6 month history of declining mobility, generalised apathy, behavioural disturbance and a gradual deterioration in her vision.
She was wheel-chair bound and incontinent of urine with excoriated skin upon admission.
At the age of 38 years she developed progressive visual loss to 6/60 bilaterally over a 6-month period necessitating early retirement from her nursing career.
Initial investigations showed visual evoked potentials were delayed with small amplitude bilaterally.
MRI of brain demonstrated extensive diffuse white matter changes.
The patient then defaulted from follow-up until her current admission.
Her functional decline meant her husband was acting as her full-time carer upon admission.
On examination she was orientated but unable to follow 1 stage commands consistently.
She required a hoist for transfer and was bed bound.
Visual acuity was reduced to finger counting bilaterally with bilateral pallor of the optic discs.
There was spasticity of all four limbs (Ashworth scale 3 bilaterally) with sustained clonus in the lower limbs and pyramidal weakness grade 3/5.
She was hyper-reflexic and the plantar responses were extensor.
Sensation was normal.
Initial investigations demonstrated a low folate (1.
6 µg/L, normal range 3.
1–17.
5 µg/L) and borderline low vitamin B12 (211 ng/L, normal range 200–940 ng/L).
Her tyrosine was 56 µmol/L with an elevated phenylalanine 1564 µmol/L (120–480 µmol/L), consistent with untreated PKU.
MRI brain showed extensive abnormal T2 high signal affecting grey matter and subcortical white matter within the frontal and parietal lobes with some atrophy.
The following tests were either normal or negative: HIV, antinuclear body, extractable nuclear antigen, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody plasma viscosity, syphilis antibody, vitamin B6, full blood count, liver function tests, thyroid function tests, protein electrophoresis and urine Bence-Jones protein, chest X-ray, pelvis and hip X-ray.
A 32-year-old man with history of alcoholic cirrhosis presented with 2 weeks of worsening abdominal distension and skin yellowing.
He was diagnosed with cirrhosis 2 years prior after presenting in acute liver failure.
During his previous hospitalisation, he reported 10 years of significant alcohol consumption, typically drinking either 32 ounces of beer or 10 shots of liquor daily.
Imaging revealed a cirrhotic-appearing liver and ascites.
Other than alcohol, he had no other obvious risk factors for liver disease.
He did not smoke, use illicit drugs, or take supplements or medications, including over-the-counter drugs.
Laboratory studies at this initial encounter are shown in table 1, notable for a normal creatinine and macrocytosis without overt anaemia.
Liver profile was consistent with a cholestatic pattern with a slightly elevated international normalised ratio.
Autoimmune markers, including antinuclear antibodies, antimitochondrial antibodies and antismooth muscle antibodies, were negative, as were serology markers for viral hepatitis.
Ceruloplasmin and serum copper were within normal range.
His Maddrey discriminant function was 16.
5, so he did not receive steroids.
He was treated conservatively with supportive care, and his transaminases normalised.
Total bilirubin improved from 10.
1 to 6.
8 mg/dL at the time of discharge.
Subsequently, he was lost to follow-up until his present admission.
At his present admission, the patient’s social history was unchanged, with continued consumption of five shots of liquor daily.
His last drink was 2 weeks prior to admission.
Family history was notable for oesophageal cancer in his father
otherwise, there was no family history of liver disease, though he had no siblings.
He denied fevers, vomiting, bleeding, or changes in bowel movements.
He did note a decrease in urine volume.
Physical examination on admission was notable for jaundice with markedly icteric sclera and a diffusely tender, protuberant abdomen with a fluid wave.
He was awake and fully oriented, without asterixis, on initial evaluation.
During the hospitalisation, he became increasingly confused and lethargic.
Subsequent physical examinations were notable for the development of asterixis and worsened abdominal distension with bilateral pitting oedema.
Liver profile included alanine transaminase (ALT) 51 U/L (reference 10–50 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 113 U/L (reference 10–50 U/L) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 153 U/L (reference 40–129 U/L).
Total bilirubin was 38.
5 mg/dL (reference 0.
2–1.
3 mg/dL), with direct bilirubin >20 mg/dL (reference 0.
0–0.
3 mg/dL).
Viral serology indicated immunity to hepatitis A and B and a non-reactive hepatitis C antibody test.
Basic metabolic panel was notable for creatinine of 6.
7 mg/dL (baseline 0.
5 mg/dL during prior admission).
Haemoglobin was 98 g/L on admission and dropped to 65 g/L during the course of his hospitalisation (reference 132–169 g/L).
Mean corpuscular volume was minimally elevated to 92.
9 fL (reference 79.
0–92.
2 fL).
White blood cell count was 21.
24×109/L (reference 4.
22–10.
33×109/ L).
Paracentesis was performed
peritoneal fluid contained 69 nucleated cells/μL, and fluid protein was 0.
4 g/dL.
His serum to ascites albumin gradient was 2.
1 g/dL.
Peritoneal fluid gram stain and cultures were negative.
Thus, peritoneal fluid was consistent with cirrhosis and was not indicative of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis.
Blood and urine cultures did not grow organisms.
Abdominal ultrasound and abdominal CT scan on admission were consistent with cirrhosis and noted large volume ascites, similar to previous imaging.
His hospital course was marked by worsening encephalopathy, significant renal disease in the absence of a recognisable toxic exposure that required dialysis, and a suspected haemolytic anaemia, given his worsening anaemia without an obvious source of bleeding.
Ceruloplasmin was repeated and was low at 17.
6 mg/dL (reference >20 mg/dL).
Kayser-Fleischer rings, which result from copper deposition in Descemet’s membrane of the cornea,10 were identified on slit-lamp examination by two separate ophthalmologists.
Twenty-four-hour urine copper was elevated at 62 μg/24 hours (reference 3–50 μg/24 hours).
A woman in her late 60s reported a 6-week history of progressive bilateral lower limb weakness, paraesthesia and numbness spreading proximally.
She also noted a month of abdominal bloating and 1 kg of unintentional weight loss.
Examination showed reduced power at hip flexion medical research council muscle power assessment grade 2/5 in the left and 3/5 in the right.
Lower limb reflexes were absent and her plantars mute.
There was a pinprick sensory level to T4 and impaired proprioception to the ankles.
Upper limb and cranial nerve examination was normal.
The remainder of her physical examination was normal.
An MRI of the spine showed longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis extending from C2 to T5, with associated swelling and cord expansion at T2 level.
MRI brain was normal.
Serum analysis was positive for anti-AQP4 antibodies and hepatitis B core antigen and negative for anti-MOG (Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein) antibodies, HIV and syphilis serology.
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed normal range white blood cells, lactate, no oligoclonal bands and no elevated immunoglobulins.
A diagnosis of NMOSD was made, and as part of her further work up, CT imaging identified extensive para-aortic and pelvic side wall lymphadenopathy, a bulky multifibroid uterus and an adjacent enhancing nodule raising concern of an ovarian lesion.
MRI pelvis showed fibroids, with well-visualised and normal appearing ovaries.
Positron emission tomography (PET)-CT scan showed an FDG (fluorodeoxyglucose)-avid conglomerate of lymph nodes in the left para-aortic, common iliac, internal iliac, external iliac, right supraclavicular and bilateral subpectoral regions.
Subsequent histology of a CT-guided lymph node biopsy identified small to medium-sized lymphoid cells arranged in a vague nodular pattern.
Immunohistochemistry showed lymphoid cells positive for CD20, CD79a, CD19, BCL-2, CD10 and BCL-6 and confirmed a low-grade follicular lymphoma.
Cyclin-D1 was negative and Ki-67 stained less than 5% of all cells.
The patient had a follicular lymphoma international prognostic index (FLIPI) score of 4 (based on age >60-years old, greater than four nodal sites, haemoglobin of <120 g/L and stage 3 disease).
A previously well six-year-old male with no significant past medical or family history presented with a three-day history of worsening altered sensorium associated with fever.
Of interest, it was noted that he had generalized skin hyperpigmentation involving his face, trunk, limbs, and mucous membranes.
This finding was not observed in his immediate family members.
Initial blood investigations showed no evidence of infection, but his serum sodium was low (126 mmol/ L).
An urgent non-contrasted, computed tomographic (CT) scan of his brain initially reported a large cavum septum pellucidum et cavum vergi with hydrocephalus.
Further delineation with a follow-up magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain demonstrated there was an enlarged cyst of the cavum vergi measuring up to 3.
2 cm in diameter.
This structure was interpreted as causing obstructive hydrocephalus with transependymal seepage of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
Intraoperatively, the cyst fluid was observed to be under high pressure and turbid.
At this point in time, the working diagnosis was that of symptomatic hydrocephalus secondary to meningoencephalitis.
Further tests demonstrated that the hyponatremia was secondary to the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH).
Fluid from the CVC had a high protein level (11 g/L) but was otherwise negative for any infective or autoimmune markers.
The genetics team was consulted to assess his unusual pattern of skin hyperpigmentation.
A failed short Synacthen test confirmed primary adrenal insufficiency.
The workup for peroxisomal disorders showed that his very long-chain fatty acid (VLCFA) analysis had a high concentration of hexacosanoic acid (C26) with concurrent abnormal ratios of other VLCFAs (C26: C22 and C24: C22).
This profile was consistent with a diagnosis of X-ALD.
Next, a closer review of the preoperative MRI brain images noted there were symmetrical areas of increased T2-weighted/fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) signal changes in the periventricular white matter of bilateral parieto-occipital regions, involving the corpus callosum, thalami, cerebral peduncles, midbrain, and pons.
Based on the neuroimaging criteria, his Loes score was 9-10.
A 30-year-old Caucasian man was referred for further investigation and management of hyperuricaemia.
The medical history included 14 years of chronic gout, recurrent nephrolithiasis, hypertension and psoriasis.
There was no significant family history and no history of cognitive or neurobehavioural deficits.
His management included allopurinol, but serum uric acid levels had been consistently measured above 0.
8 mmol/L (reference range 0.
15–0.
50).
His renal function was normal with creatinine 105 μmol/L, urea 7.
3 mmol/L and estimated glomerular filtration rate 72 ml/min per 1.
On examination, there was no obvious posturing.
A gouty tophus was palpated over the right olecranon and tophi were observed at the medial aspect of the first metatarsal–phalangeal joints.
Tophi and joint deformity were also observed in the hands at the third proximal interphalangeal joints, the left second distal interphalangeal and the right fifth proximal and distal interphalangeal joints.
Scaling plaques were noted on the extensor surfaces of the elbows and knees.
Neurological examination revealed generalised hyperreflexia and weakness, power 4/5, in all muscle groups of the upper and lower limbs.
There was no dystonia, clonus or spasticity.
HGPRT activity was investigated with erythrocyte enzymology testing and the result of 0.
1 U/g haemoglobin (reference range 3.
0–6.
7) confirmed the diagnosis of HGPRT deficiency.
An male child aged 11 months born out of a consanguineous marriage with history of normal delivery and no history of perinatal asphyxia presented to our department for investigation.
Patient had an unremarkable neonatal period until 5 months of age.
After that he started suffering from fever, intermittent episodes of myoclonic seizures and regression of milestones.
Patient was the first and only child of the parents.
Similar history and presentation was not present in any of the first-degree relatives.
On clinical examination, patient had sparse, kinky and hypopigmented hair with easy pluckability.
This patient had fair complexion, was hypotonic and irritable.
Head circumference of the patient was 42.
8 cm, which was below third percentile for that age.
MRI findings revealed bilateral subdural hygromas on both T2 weighted sequence (T2W) and Fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images with associated cerebral atrophy.
T2W axial and coronal images showed bilateral cerebral and cerebellar atrophy.
Axial diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and ADC showed white matter lesion with restricted diffusion on both sides.
MR angiography (time-of-flight) images showed tortuous extracranial and intracranial vessels.
After MRI, patient was advised biochemical investigations.
Findings revealed low serum copper 40 mg/dL (normal range 70–140 mg/dL) and low ceruloplasmin level 5 mg/dL (normal 15–60 mg/dL).
A 10-year-old, right handed, Muslim girl from Moulvibazar was admitted to the Department of Neurology, Dhaka Medical College Hospital with the complaint of occasional left hemicranial headache for the last 5 years.
The headache was throbbing, pulsatile in nature, of moderate intensity and associated with nausea, vomiting and photophobia.
About 10–15 min before the headache, she saw bright sparkles of light in front of her eyes.
The headache occurred every 1–2 months and persisted for few hours to 3 days.
For the last 3 years, during some of the episodes she had also experienced transient weakness of the left side of her body, which started 15–30 min after the headache.
This weakness usually persisted for 1–2 h and resolved spontaneously without any residual disability.
She had no history of concurrent fever, trauma, convulsion, involuntary movement, change in speech, sensory impairment or loss of consciousness.
She had no other significant past medical history.
None of her family members have migraine-like headache.
Physical examination was entirely normal and no neurological deficits were found.
Clinically, she was diagnosed as having ‘sporadic hemiplegic migraine’ according to International Headache Society (IHS) criteria.
All her routine investigations and vasculitic markers (ESR, ANA, anti-ds-DNA, C-ANCA, P-ANCA) were unremarkable.
However, MRI of the brain showed tiny flow voids in the basal ganglia region, predominantly in the left thalamus.
Magnetic resonant angiogram (MRA) of the brain showed narrowing of the MCAs, ACAs, PCAs and their branches with poor visualisation of distal terminations, suggesting moyamoya disease.
These findings were confirmed by digital subtraction angiogram (DSA) of the brain which revealed discontinuation of the right ICA at the supraclenoid level after the PCom A junction.
Multiple dural and meningeal vessels supplied the right MCA and right ACA territory giving the typical smoky angiographic appearance.
Right external carotid artery and left external carotid artery angiogram revealed multiple dural and meningeal twigs compensating the deprived area.
Left ICA angiogram showed discontinuation of the left ICA just after the junction of the ophthalmic branch with the typical smoky angiographic appearance of moyamoya disease.
Left vertebral artery and right vertebral artery angiogram revealed normal findings with multiple choroidal and meningeal collaterals compensating the deprived ACA and MCA vascular territory.
An 8-year-old boy was referred to our paediatric endocrinology clinic due to progressive fatigue and generalised hyperpigmentation beginning at 2-years old.
He had no episodes of loss of consciousness, salt-craving or gastrointestinal complaints of nausea and vomiting.
The patient attended the third grade and had been retained because of learning disabilities.
There were no other relevant facts of his medical history.
He was the third child of unrelated healthy parents with uneventful family history, namely no relatives with identified psychiatric, neurological or endocrine disorders.
On clinical examination, he presented with prominent adynamia and muscle weakness.
He had generalised skin hyperpigmentation, especially of palmar creases and of the buccal mucosa.
Pubic hair growth was absent and testicular volume was estimated inferior to 4 ml bilaterally (Tanner stage I).
There was no hypotension and growth parameters (weight on 10th–25th percentile, stature on 10th percentile) were normal for sex and age.
His mental status and neurological evaluation were normal.
There were no other significant findings in the remaining clinical examination.
Laboratory results showed hyponatraemia (124 mmol/l, normal range 135–145 mmol/l) and hyperkalaemia (6.
5 mmol/l, normal range 3.
6 mmol/l).
Serum concentrations for creatinine, blood urea nitrogen, calcium and complete blood count were within normal limits.
Plasma renin activity (46.
5 ng/ml/h, normal range 0.
9–1.
9 ng/ml/h) and aldosterone (15 pg/ml, normal range 40–760 pg/ml) serum concentrations confirmed mineralocorticoid deficiency.
The measurement of morning cortisol (2.
9 μg/dl, normal range 5.
0–11.
0 μg/dl) and ACTH levels (9279.
0 pg/ml, normal range 0.
0–46.
0 pg/ml) established the diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency.
Antiadrenal antibody levels were negative excluding autoimmune adrenal insufficiency.
Testosterone concentrations (552 ng/dl, normal range 166–811 ng/dl), dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate (61.
4 μg/dl, normal range 70.
2–492.
0 μg/dl), serum follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinising hormone (3.
16 mUI/ml and 2.
58 mUI/ml, respectively) were within normal limits.
Given the laboratory findings concentrations of VLCFA in the plasma were determined and proved to be increased (C26:0, 0.
8 μg/ml (normal 0.
16–0.
57 μg/ml), C24:0/C22:0 ratio 1.
48 (normal ratio 0.
63–1.
10), C26:0/C22:0, 0.
047 (normal ratio 0.
004–0.
022)) establishing the diagnosis of X-ALD.
Abdominal MRI showed no structural abnormalities.
Brain MRI revealed symmetrical T2-weighted signal intensities of the posterior peritrigonal regions bilaterally, and involvement of the splenium of the corpus callosum (Loes pattern 1), without calcification areas.
Spinal cord and cervical MRI was normal.
A previously healthy 52-year-old man was sent to the Internal Medicine outpatient clinic to investigate an accidentally discovered pancytopenia.
The patient had been reporting of asthenia, anorexia and non-quantified weight loss for some time.
The initial workup revealed an unexplained splenomegaly and only the thrombocytopenia persisted.
He was diagnosed with a dyslipidaemia.
Liver function was completely normal and viral serologies were negative (cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, hepatitis C and B, HIV and parvovirus).
Antinuclear antibodies were also negative and serum protein electrophoresis, immunophenotyping and β-2-microglobulin were normal.
The splenomegaly was heterogeneous with some hypodense nodules.
CT of the lungs showed a generalised interstitial pattern and pulmonary function tests revealed low diffusing capacity of carbon monoxide (DLCO) and hypoxaemia.
While the patient was waiting for a bone marrow aspiration and biopsy, he was admitted in the emergency department with an acute, sharp, left flank abdominal pain, accompanied by syncope.
His haemoglobin was 7.
9 g/dL and the CT scan showed a splenic rupture.
The patient was submitted to emergency splenectomy and the histological findings were consistent with diffuse histiocytosis.
The patient finally had a bone marrow biopsy, which revealed sea-blue histiocytosis, a sign of a storage disease.
The NPD was confirmed when residual activity of ASM in peripheral blood leucocytes and cultured skin fibroblasts of less than 10% of that of controls was detected (sphingomyelinase activity 0.
0 nmol/h/mg with a normal range between 0.
84 and 3.
36 in peripheral blood and 3 nmol/h/mg with a normal range between 18 and 300 in cultivated fibroblasts of the skin).
A 25-year-old woman presented to us with insidious onset, gradually progressive symptoms in the form of imbalance, and a tendency to fall while walking of 2 years duration.
In addition, she had noticed slurring of her speech for the past 1 year, and difficulty in swallowing since the past 6 months.
She had no history of cognitive decline, behaviour abnormality, seizures, involuntary movements, parkinsonism, motor weakness, sensory symptoms or autonomic dysfunction.
She had no significant medical history, and no history to suggest similar illness in other family members.
On general examination she was found to have pallor and mild splenomegaly.
Neurological examination was positive for restriction of gaze both in the horizontal and vertical directions with preserved movements elicited using the oculocephalic manoeuvre, slow saccades, mixed dysarthria having both cerebellar and pseudobulbar features, decreased palatal movements, Babinski sign bilaterally and gait ataxia with minimal limb ataxia.
Complete blood counts showed a haemoglobin level of 8.
6 g/dL, TC of 7300/mm3 and a platelet count of 163 000/mm3.
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 16 mm/h.
Peripheral smear revealed a microcytic hypochromic anaemia.
Blood sugar, renal, liver and thyroid functions were normal.
Serum lactate, copper and ceruloplasmin assays were within the normal range.
Ultrasound abdomen confirmed splenomegaly, where as the rest of the study was normal.
In view of the clinical findings, we performed an MRI of the brain specifically looking for abnormalities in the brainstem and cerebellum in view of the clinical presentation
however this was found to be normal.
Nerve conduction studies were normal.
Cardiac evaluation with ECG and echocardiogram was normal.
Bone marrow aspiration and trephine biopsy showed scattered foamy histiocytes in a background of normal hematopoietic cells.
Sphingomyelinase enzyme assay was within normal limits.
We report a 6-year-old boy who presented with complaints of the paucity of movement of the right side of the body since 2½ years of age and multiple episodes of convulsions since 3 years of age.
He was apparently well till 2½ years of age when he developed insidious onset of weakness involving right upper and lower limb.
At the age of 3 years, he developed a cluster of flexor spasms on awakening from sleep.
This was followed by loss of attained language and cognitive skills.
By the age of 6 years, he developed multiple types of daily seizure including nocturnal tonic seizure, tonic drop attacks, and head drops.
On examination, his head circumference was <−3SD.
Motor examination revealed increased tone in right upper limb and lower limb, power of <3/5 MRC, brisk deep tendon reflexes, and extensor plantar response.
Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging brain reveals bilateral asymmetric chronic infarcts with contrast scan showing a bunch of collaterals in a basal cistern.
MR angiography revealed occlusion of the bilateral distal internal carotid artery with preserved posterior circulation and dense collaterals suggestive of moyamoya disease (MMD).
His electroencephalography (EEG) revealed generalized spike and slow wave complex (1–1.
5 Hz, 200–300 uV) with a paucity of sleep markers and generalized paroxysmal fast activity consistent with EEG findings of LGS.
He was started on oral aspirin (5 mg/kg/day) with oral valproate, levetiracetam, lamotrigine, and clonazepam with seizure reduction to 1–2 episodes of tonic drop attacks.
The patient is scheduled for revascularization surgery.
The triplets were born via cesarean section at 29 weeks gestation.
Two boys were identical twins and one was fraternal.
The mother had suffered from fetal alcohol syndrome and had a history of developmental delay and depression.
Aside from bed rest, the pregnancy was unremarkable.
Their Apgar scores were 8 and 8 at 1 and 5 minutes respectively.
They had a typical neonatal intensive care unit course, which included evaluation for sepsis and possible necrotizing enterocolitis, apnea and bradycardia.
Cranial ultrasounds revealed no intracranial hemorrhage.
The triplets were in the neonatal intensive care unit for approximately two months and then discharged home on routine oral feedings without a requirement for supplemental oxygen or medications.
Initially, developmental progress was achieved in all domains.
The triplets rolled over at 10 months, sat up at 11 months, began crawling at 12 months and walking at 15 months.
By 16 months they were speaking in 2 to 3 word sentences, feeding themselves with utensils and adequately navigating through fine motor tasks.
Around 16 months of age, there was a rapid and striking change in development in the three boys.
Regression in motor skills was recognized first.
The gross motor skills were more affected than the fine motor skills.
They lost their ability to walk, crawl, sit up, and roll over.
Loss of head control followed.
During that time, the family noted left-sided ptosis in all three.
Over the next few weeks their speech and language skills declined to the expression of one-syllable words.
They also lost fine motor skills and pincer grasp.
Deep tendon reflexes were preserved.
A battery of metabolic and genetic testing was performed, including plasma amino acids, urine organic acids, cerebrospinal fluid neurotransmitters and amino acids.
All were within normal range.
A brain MRI showed T2 hyperintense periventricular lesions that were difficult to distinguish from normal terminal myelination zones.
Measurement of arylsulfatase A activity in leukocytes showed levels of 4.
5, 7.
8 and 8.
1 nmol/h/mg protein in the triplets versus a normal mean of about 80 nmol/h/mg protein.
Urine analysis showed an increase in sulfatides.
DNA analysis revealed one copy of the common LI mutation (G459+1A) in each child.
The other mutation in these children is a deletion starting between intron 6 and exon 8 and extending beyond the end of the gene.
These are both severe mutations likely to lead to a late infantile presentation.
By 24 months of age, they developed progressive truncal hypotonia with peripheral spasticity.
All three displayed persistent fisting of the hands, facial weakness, and diffuse hyperreflexia.
A nerve conduction study revealed normal conduction velocities in the median, ulnar, tibial and peroneal nerves.
At 36 months of age they began to complain of pain with minimal passive movement of the limbs, particularly the legs.
This was aggravated during activities such as dressing and physical activity but did not occur at rest or when unprovoked.
Pain episodes led to increased dystonia and worsened spasticity.
Progressive lower extremity spasticity, especially in the gastrocnemius, led to plantar flexion of the feet at rest.
Baclofen was initiated to alleviate the worsening spasticity.
Hip radiographs did not reveal uncovering of subluxation of the femoral heads.
Regarding development, they continued to use single words, identify body parts through pointing, smile and have meaningful interactions with their parents and caregivers.
In the subsequent months they developed oromotor dysfunction and difficulty with weight gain.
A swallow study documented aspiration of thin liquids.
All three children underwent surgery for gastric tube placement.
For the next several months, no aspiration problems or airway obstruction occurred.
None of the triplets had seizures, either clinically or electrographically.
Gastric motility slowed and continuous feeds with frequent breaks and venting were required to maintain comfort.
Gabapentin was initiated to help with neuropathic-enteral pain.
Over time, the boys’ nutritional status declined secondary to the feeding intolerance.
They developed iron deficiency.
A follow-up MRI was performed at 4 years of age and confirmed radiographic progression of white matter disease in all three.
The boys became less interactive and required increased levels of voice and tactile stimulation to respond.
A 17-year-old unmarried girl from Bodo community (an ethnic community of Assam), resident of Barpeta district of Assam, born of nonconsanguineous marriage, with normal birth and developmental history, presented with imbalance while walking since around 2 years ago, with tendency to reel and fall in an unpredictable direction, along with in-coordination of both hands since same duration, causing difficulty in writing, eating, and operating appliances.
The above symptoms were progressive in nature.
Her medical history was otherwise unremarkable.
There was no relevant past history.
There was no history of exposure to alcohol, drugs, or toxins.
There was history of similar symptoms in her mother and maternal uncle, suggestive of autosomal dominant inheritance
however, this could not be confirmed by molecular studies.
Examination: She had normal vitals and general examination
mental status and speech were normal.
Cranial nerves examination including fundii did not reveal any abnormality.
Motor system examination revealed normal bulk and power, normal tone and deep tendon reflexes in all four limbs, and plantars bilateral flexor.
All modalities of sensation were intact.
There were cerebellar signs in both upper and lower limbs with ataxic gait.
Normal routine blood, liver function test, renal function test, no K-F ring seen on slit lamp examination.
MRI brain revealed cerebellar atrophy.
A seven-year-old male patient, born from a non-consanguineous couple, presented with unaltered development until three years of age, when he displayed refractory epilepsy characterized by generalized tonic-clonic, focal motor, and absences seizures, progressing to daily myoclonic-atonic seizures.
Ataxia and neuropsychomotor regression of development were also observed from the age of 4.
5 years, when treatment with valproic acid was introduced.
EEG evaluations as follows: a) at the age of 4 years, EEG showed absence of sleep spindles and spike-wave discharges in the posterior region of the brain
b) at the age of 6 years, the second EEG showed a worsening of the background activity of sleep and an increase in epileptiform discharges with a multifocal pattern, in addition to generalized spike-waves and c) at the age of 7 years, the third EEG showed a more pronounced increase in generalized epileptiform discharges followed by a transient attenuation of background activity.
Of note, photoparoxysmal response was absent in all the three EEGs.
These enzyme evaluations were performed when the patient was at 5 years and 6 months of age.
The results revealed a reduced enzymatic activity of TTP1 (0.
4 nmol/h/ml
normal range from 4.
0 to 23 nmol/h/ml) and mild reduction in PTT1 (7.
1 nmol/h/ml of a normal range from 9.
4 to 11 nmol/h/ml).
At the most recent evaluation (at 8 years of age), the patient was restricted to bed without active interactions with the environment or other people.
The patient displayed lack of speech, apathy, axial-predominant hypotonia, tetraparesis with hyperreflexia and bilateral signs of pyramidal release such as clonus and Babinski sign.
Gastrostomy has been performed for nutritional support.
A two-day-old female neonate was referred to the pediatrics department with the mother of the baby complaining of laxity of skin, thin body stature, a progeroid feature, bilateral claw-like hands, and mild respiratory distress.
This female infant was the first live child born to healthy parents with a history of third-degree consanguinity of marriage and without a significant history of congenital abnormalities in the family.
The mother, aged 22 years, had regular ante-natal check-ups, consisting of three doctor visits in the first trimester and six doctor visits in the third trimester.
There was no history of fever or rash in the first trimester.
She was not on any medication for other conditions.
Her thyroid function tests were normal.
Iron and folic acid (IFA) prophylaxis and two doses of tetanus toxoid were administered in the second trimester.
The mother had a history of first-trimester abortion one year ago.
There was no history of anemia, pregnancy-induced hypertension (PIH), or exposure to radiation or chemicals during pregnancy.
Intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) was noted in the third trimester.
The mother underwent a normal vaginal delivery at full term of gestational age.
The child did not cry immediately after birth.
The infant’s birth weight was 1500 g, birth length was 44 cm, head circumference was 30.
8 cm, chest circumference was 29.
7 cm, and ponderal index was 1.
88.
The vital signs of the patient were within normal limits.
The appearance of the child is progeroid with frontal bossing, dysmorphic facies, micropthalmia with strabismus, and a long philtrum The anterior and posterior fontanels were wide.
The ears were low-set with large ear lobes.
There were excessive skin folds over the limbs and generalized hypotonia.
The upper limbs showed flexion deformity of the wrists and hyper-extensible metacarpophalangeal joints associated with clawing of the hands.
The chest wall showed marked pectus excavatum.
The skin over the abdomen and thorax was very thin and transparent.
There were visible veins over the chest and abdomen.
Examination of the external genitalia revealed mild clitoromegaly.
Examination of the eyes revealed hypotelorism, bilateral corneal opacities, and cataract formation.
Rooting and sucking reflexes were normal with incomplete Moro’s reflexes.
The dermatological evaluation revealed wrinkled, thin, atrophic skin with reduced subcutaneous fat.
Verhoeff-van Gieson's staining of the tissue from the skin biopsy demonstrated scanty, tiny, and fragmented elastic fibers, as well as a noticeably reduced amount of elastic tissue fibres in the lower dermis.
The infant was brought to the hospital after one month with complaints of cold, cough, and immobility of the right lower limb.
There was no improvement in this infant’s condition.
Corneal opacities became more apparent.
The skin folds were also prominent, with visible veins over the thorax and abdomen.
Bilateral clawing of hands was noted.
A 28-year-old man presented to us with swelling in front of the neck since 3 years.
The patient was apparently asymptomatic till the age of 25 years.
The swelling had gradually increased in size and he had come to us with cosmetic concerns.
There was no voice change or difficulty in swallowing.
There were no paroxysms of sweating or palpitation.
He did not have diarrhoea or any other gastrointestinal symptoms.
The patient had no family history of similar neck swelling.
After examination, he was found to have firm thyromegaly with enlargement of both lobes of thyroid.
No nodules or neck nodes were palpable.
The patient also had thick bumpy lips and mucosal neuroma involving the vermilion border of the upper lip.
Slit-lamp evaluation showed hypertrophic medullated corneal nerves.
He had normal blood pressure during the office visit.
The patient was admitted for suspected multiple endocrine neoplasia.
During the hospital stay, the patient was found to have labile hypertension.
Serum calcitonin level was grossly elevated (1363.
2 pmol/l [normal value<48 pmol/l]) and plasma-free metaphrine was 1318.
2 pmol/l [normal value <456 pmol/l]) values were elevated.
Contrast-enhanced CT adrenal was done which showed a well-defined enhancing lesion in the right adrenal gland, suggestive of phaeochromocytoma.
MIBG scan was done which showed avid tracer uptake in the right adrenal and thyroid.
This confirmed the presence of medullary thyroid carcinoma and phaeochromocytoma.
A girl patient aged 11 years 2 months was referred to the Queensland Paediatric and Adolescent Gynaecology Service with adrenarche, hyperandrogenism and obesity.
History revealed adrenarche at age 8 years, with gradual onset of worsening hirsutism, acne and deepening of the voice over 2 years prior to referral.
Menarche occurred at age 10 years and 11 months, with two light menses lasting 1 day at approximately a 28-day interval prior to presentation.
The patient had a background of anxiety, mild attention-deficient hyperactivity disorder and learning problems, and chronic bronchitis.
There was a family history of maternal gestational diabetes.
On examination, her findings were as follows: Blood pressure 138/87 (>99th centile), height 166 cm (>99th centile), weight 98.
5 kg (>99th centile), body mass index (BMI) 35.
3 kg/m2 (>99th centile) and waist circumference 108.
5 cm (>99th centile).
She had normal facial features, with severe acanthosis nigricans visible on her neck, axillae and elbow creases and thick terminal hairs over her face, chest, abdomen, linea alba, lower back, legs, arms with a modified Ferriman–Gallwey score of 19.
Acne was visible over her face, back, chest and inner thighs.
Breast development to Tanner Stage 4 and Pubic Hair Stage 5 was noted.
She had no clitoromegaly or virilisation of the external female genitalia.
Her cardiorespiratory and abdominal examination was otherwise unremarkable.
Investigations had found a normal full blood count (FBC), luteinising hormone (LH) 9.
7 U/L, Follicular stimulating hormone (FSH) 4.
6 U/L and oestradiol 140 pmol/L.
Serum testosterone and free testosterone were found to be markedly elevated at 3.
9 nmol/L (normal <2.
5) and 122 pmol/L (range 10–45), respectively, androstenedione 10 nmol/L (range 0.
8–6.
1) and low sex hormone-binding globulin 13 nmol/L (range 40–90).
Adrenal hormone investigations found normal cortisol, normal adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), normal 17-hydroprogesterone 2.
8 nmol/L (0.
1) and mildly elevated dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) 5.
5 μmol/L (normal <4.
0).
Thyroid function was normal.
A 24-hour urinary steroid profile showed high androgen levels and cortisone but not cortisol, consistent with PCOS but not congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) or Cushing syndrome.
Fasting insulin levels were grossly elevated at 266 mU/L (normal 2.
0–23) with a Haemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) 6.
1% (43.
2 mmol/mol).
Insulin-like Growth Hormone 1 (IGF1) was slightly elevated at 76 nmol/L (9.
9–71) and growth hormone (GH) was low normal at 0.
24 mcg/L (0.
05–8.
00) which along with a normal MRI brain with pituitary slices excluded gigantism and pituitary adenoma as a cause for early puberty.
Imaging with MRI and CT adrenals were performed to exclude adrenal pathology and both were unremarkable.
The histopathology was consistent with polycystic ovaries.
The case concerns a 52-year-old male referred for phacoemulsification under general anesthesia.
Preoperative assessment revealed a corticonuclear cataract in both eyes, with dislocation of the crystalline lens in the left eye in an area of zonular dehiscence.
Upon careful examination, both eyes showed a microspherophakic lens with an increased lens thickness and the lens equator being visible over 360° in the left eye.
The patient denied any trauma or medical conditions.
A woman in her late 20s presented with symptoms of shortness of breath on exertion, dry cough and recurrent mild hemoptysis over the last 5 years, which aggravated over the last month.
The patient had a history of respiratory infection in early childhood.
She was diagnosed with microbiologically confirmed pulmonary tuberculosis 8 years ago, for which she took 6 months of antitubercular treatment.
Her chest X-ray showed a hyperlucent area in the right lower zone with cystic shadows in the right paracardiac area.
Spirometry showed a restrictive pattern with reduced forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) of 0.
84 L, forced vital capacity (FVC) of 0.
98 L and FEV1/FVC ratio of 85.
71%.
The mid-forced expiratory flow (25–75%) was 27% of the predicted, suggesting small airway obstruction.
A high-resolution CT scan of the thorax revealed the right middle lobe and bilateral lower lobe bronchiectasis with a collapsed right lower lobe and areas of decreased attenuation, suggesting hyperinflation surrounding the affected area on the right side.
The area of decreased attenuation showed a reduced number and calibre of blood vessels, suggesting decreased pulmonary blood flow.
A few small calcified granulomas in the lateral segment of the right middle lobe with bronchiectatic changes were suggestive of an old infection.
Active tuberculosis was ruled out, and the patient was started on inhaled bronchodilators and inhaled corticosteroids.
A 26-year-old Filipino male presented at the Philippine General Hospital outpatient clinic because of the absence of pubertal development.
He was born full term via normal spontaneous delivery to a 26-year-old mother.
He has no siblings.
He was circumcised at birth.
Micropenis was observed but no further consultation was sought.
He had normal developmental milestones and intelligence was at par with age.
At 11 years of age, he was seen at Ophthalmology clinic for frequent lacrimation.
He was diagnosed with bilateral congenital absence of upper and lower puncta.
He was advised further evaluation and possible corrective surgery, however, he was lost to follow-up.
At age 15 he had psychiatric counselling for a conduct disorder from a disruptive behaviour after friends kept on teasing him for ‘looking like a girl’.
It was at this time that he noted hyposmia.
He had no history of seizures, blurring of vision, colour blindness, hearing loss and movement disorders.
At present, he is a second year college student.
Family history is unremarkable on the maternal side.
No medical information can be obtained on the paternal side.
On physical examination, his weight was 52 kg, height was 170 cm, arm span was 176 cm, crown to pubis was 74 cm, pubis to heel was 96 cm with a ratio of 0.
77 compatible with eunuchoid stature.
He has high pitched voice, absent upper and lower puncta bilaterally, smooth philtrum and thin upper lip (figure 1).
He showed absence of hair over face, axillae and legs.
He has sparse pubic hair (Tanner stage 2), bilateral descended prepubertal testes measuring 1ml using the orchidometer and microphallus, with penile length of 2.
0 cm (figure 2).
There were no other abnormalities on systemic examination.
Neurologic examination was essentially normal except for decreased sense of smell.
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed normal liver, gallbladder, pancreas, spleen, kidneys and urinary bladder.
Both testes are small in size and volume (<4 cc) on scrotal ultrasound
the right testis measures 1.
8×1.
3×0.
8 cm and the left testis measures 1.
2×0.
8 cm.
Hormonal assay results included serum follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinising hormone (LH) and testosterone which revealed hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
Radioisotope Laboratory Philippine General Hospital Imaging MRI of the brain showed normal pituitary gland, hypoplastic left olfactory bulb and aplastic right olfactory bulb.
A 30-year-old unmarried male presented with insidious-onset gradually progressive difficulty in walking, maintaining balance and change in speech for the last 5 years with frequent falls.
There is no history of weakness, paresthesia, difficulty in micturition or defecation, seizure, visual symptoms or headache.
He was born out of a non-consanguineous marriage with a normal perinatal and developmental history.
However, there is a history of similar illness in his elder brother who had difficulty in walking and poorly developed secondary sexual characteristics.
General examination showed a pulse of 78 /min, regular, normal volume and character, blood pressure of 120/70 mm Hg and respiratory rate of 14 /min, without pallor, icterus, oedema, joint tenderness or swelling or rash.
However, there was a characteristic absence of facial hairs, sparse axillary and pubic hairs with a stretch penile length of 5 cm and bilateral low testicular volume of 10 mL.
Neurocutaneous markers were not seen.
There was evidence of cataract in both eyes.
Neurological examination showed normal higher mental functions and cranial nerves including fundus examination.
Motor examination revealed normal tone, power of limbs, deep tendon reflexes and flexor plantar response.
The examination of gait showed a broad-based ataxic gait, with swaying to both sides and a tendency to fall during turns.
The patient also had dysmetria, dysarthria (scanning speech) and mild intention tremor in the upper limbs.
Sensory examination was normal with absent Rhomberg’s sign.
His laboratorical workup showed a normal hemogram, renal profile, liver function and electrolytes.
Blood work showed hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (testosterone level of 11.
39 ng/dL (normal lab range of 400–1080 ng/dL), luteinising hormone 0.
11 mIU/mL (normal 1.
5–9.
3 mIU/mL), follicle stimulating hormone <0.
3mIU/mL (normal 1.
4–18.
1 mIU/mL)) with normal thyroid stimulating hormone, cortisol and prolactin levels.
MRI of the brain showed non-enhancing symmetric T2/FLAIR (Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery) hyperintense lesions within the subcortical white matter, thalamus and basal ganglia, with cerebellar atrophy, with no pituitary or hypothalamic lesion.
A young teenager, known with non-disjunction type trisomy 13, was presented at our emergency department because of abdominal pain and fever since 1 day.
Furthermore, she had anuria since 1 day and also minimal menstruation.
A medical history included uneventful term birth, agenesis of the corpus callosum, small muscular VSD, central apnea, intellectual disability, recurrent airway tract infections, epilepsy, hearing difficulties, recurrent urinary tract infections with bladder retention and pyelectasis in both kidneys.
Physical examination showed a painful, uncooperative girl with a distended and tense abdomen.
Her temperature was 38.
2°C.
Because of a retention bladder and urinary tract infection, ceftabuten was started and a urinary catheter was given.
Because of persistent fever and no clinical improvement after 2 days, we switched to intravenous cefuroxime with good effect.
Blood culture remained negative.
Pain and fever recurred on day 4.
Ultrasound of the abdomen showed a mass in the lower abdomen, suggestive of a periappendicular abscess.
CRP remained low (maximum 33 mg/L), but haemoglobin level dropped remarkably from 9.
0 to 5.
8 g/dL for which a blood transfusion was given.
At a second ultrasound of the abdomen the drain appeared to be inserted in an ovary/salpinx without a sign of a (recent) appendicitis as described before.
Hydrometrocolpos was suspected, secondarily leading to urinary retention and urinary tract infection.
MRI confirmed an uterus didelphys and haematocolpos of the right part.
Colposcopy showed a transverse vaginal septum with hymen imperforatus of the right part, both successfully resected.
Anticonceptive therapy was started to prevent menstruation.
A few year later in her mid-teens, she presented at our emergency department again, this time with fatigue, vomiting and stomach pain since 1 day.
Physical and laboratory examination showed no abnormalities, specifically no signs of infection.
During the admission for rehydration by nasal-gastric tube, she developed respiratory failure, requiring oxygenation via non-rebreather mask.
Physical examination revealed a new-onset heart murmur and diffuse crepitations bilaterally.
No other signs of cardiac congestion were found and ECG was normal.
PCR for respiratory viruses was negative.
Amoxicillin clavulanic acid was started because of possible aspiration pneumonia on chest X-ray.
Transthoracic echocardiogram and CT angiography were performed when she developed cardiogenic shock, showing SVA with communication between ascending aorta and right atrium.
With high-flow nasal canula and low-dose diuretics, breathing and circulation improved.
During an angiography, a Konar MF Occluder 8/6 was successfully placed in the wide sinus of Valsalva, bluntly ending in a 5 mm fistula, shunting from right coronary artery to right atrium.
Also, lifelong acetylsalicylic acid was started.
A girl in middle childhood was born full-term to a woman in her 20s (G3P2) via caesarean section with 14.
5th percentile birth weight (2770 g), 26.
8th percentile length (48 cm) and 15.
9th percentile head circumference (32.
7 cm).
Pregnancy was significant for intrauterine growth retardation and abnormal fetal echocardiogram findings.
Trivial patent ductus arteriosus and bicuspid aortic valve were confirmed at birth.
She had Marcus-Gunn jaw winking phenomenon, hyperopia with astigmatism, high-arched palate with submucous cleft and an umbilical hernia.
She was hospitalised for a week with episodes of hypoglycaemia and jaundice, which resolved with glucose infusions and phototherapy.
Her growth failure manifested with swallowing difficulty, requiring nasogastric feeding during the first year of life.
Recurrent otitis media and sinus infections were persistent during the first 5 years of life.
Thyroid function and hearing test results were normal.
Renal ultrasound showed a duplicated right intrarenal collecting system with normal ureter and kidney function.
A review of developmental milestones showed delayed skill acquisition in all domains.
The patient was able to sit, crawl, and walk at 10 months, 18 months, and 2 years and 8 months, respectively.
She started speaking at 3 years 7 months and began saying three-word phrases at 4 years.
Sensory issues were reported, including hyper-responsiveness to lights, loud noises, crowded areas and preference to specific textures.
During physical examination, the patient had good eye contact and reciprocal conversation.
However, her speech was delayed with frequent tongue protrusion.
She was mildly anxious and hyperactive.
She had a 5.
8th percentile weight (17.
6 kg), 12.
9th percentile height (113 cm), 50th percentile head circumference (51 cm), blood pressure of 95/65 mm Hg and pulse rate of 116 beats/min.
She had a long face with dolichocephaly, broad forehead, down-slanting palpebral fissures with mild left exotropia, prominent cupping ears, and mild prominent front teeth.
Her finger joints were hyperextensible with moderate pronation of both feet and pes planus.
No scoliosis was found.
Her skin was very soft.
Her neurological examination was intact.
The patient attended a kindergarten-level inclusion programme while receiving comprehensive interventions.
However, her cognitive performance was not measured due to interfering behavioural issues, including anxiety, hyperactivity and impulsivity.
A 21-year-old man of Afro-Germanic descent and known background of SCD of Sickle Cell Anaemia (HbSS)-type presented to the accident and emergency department with worsening body pain.
On examination, he was found tachycardic, tachypnoeic, feverish and drowsy.
His haemoglobin level had dropped from a baseline of 97 to 72 g/L on presentation, then further down to 55 g/L within less than 4 hours.
The patient was admitted to the intensive treatment unit (ITU) for red blood cell (RBC) exchange transfusion and later required continuous positive airway pressure ventilatory support, as the arterial blood gasses showed rising CO2 levels.
CT of the chest showed bilateral lower lobe consolidations.
Despite these measures, he had a fluctuating level of consciousness that was 5–7 initially on the Glasgow Coma Scale then fell to 3.
Due to a drop in his consciousness, falling respiratory rates and apnoeic spells, he was intubated and mechanically ventilated.
Concerns about his level of consciousness led to neuroimaging with a CT scan of the head.
The scan revealed a subacute infarct in the right frontal region.
As the patient’s reduced conscious level did not improve and seemed disproportionate to the size and area of his stroke, MRI imaging of the brain was also performed 4 days after the CT scan.
The MRI confirmed the right frontal lobe infarct and revealed widespread lesions in the deep white matter in both hemispheres in keeping with cerebral fat embolism (CFE).
A normal MR angiogram (MRA) of the cerebral vasculature ruled out moyamoya-like vasculopathy, also favouring the diagnosis of CFE.
Interestingly, MRI imaging did not show any evidence of silent cerebral infarcts, an otherwise common feature in HbSS disease.
Clinical examination revealed mild tetraparesis, more pronounced on the left with altered sensation, proprioception and neuropathic pain in the lower limbs.
Neurological investigations demonstrated critical illness neuromyopathy based on a mixed electromyography (EMG) picture.
Cardiac investigations with a bubble echocardiogram disclosed a patent foramen ovale (PFO).
He also had severe painful flexion contractures of both knees and moderate flexion contractures of both hips.
Lower limb X-rays showed extensive heterotopic ossification (HO) around his knee joints.
Worthy of note, he had bilateral painful knee swellings 3 weeks beforehand, but X-rays found no bony abnormality at the time.
He was managed with intravenous pamidronate, as well as naproxen, pregabalin and transdermal fentanyl patches.
He continued on his established regime for SCD with hydroxycarbamide (18 mg/kg) 1 g from Monday to Friday and 1.
5 g on Saturday and Sunday, along with penicillin prophylaxis.
When better, the patient was transferred to a cardiac centre where he underwent transcatheter closure of the PFO with a 35 mm Occlutech ASD Occlude (Occlutech International AB, Helsingborg, Sweden).
On his return from cardiac treatment, he was reviewed by the orthopaedic team for consideration for surgery for his severe bilateral knee HO
surgery was deemed futile at that time due to the risk of worsening recurrence and possibility of limiting the patient to a wheelchair long term.
Furthermore, on reviewing the patient, his cognitive impairment became apparent as he was unable to retain or recall information or previous conversations for reasonable lengths of time and he found decision-making challenging.
This factor added further complexity to his rehabilitation.
In this report, we describe a mild beta plus determinant associated with borderline Hb A2 and microcytic and hypochromic red cell indices found in homozygous state in a 3-year-old female toddler who initially presented to our clinic at the age of 1 year with a low Hb value of 6 g/dL during an episode of viral infection.
Due to the borderline Hb A2 value in the case, molecular investigation was undertaken.
Further investigation of the patient’s iron profile indicated that she has mild iron deficiency.
Due to the homozygous beta thalassaemia state in the patient report and the coincidental low Hb, the attending clinician recommended lifelong transfusion/chelation regimen.
The parents were worried and requested for a second opinion in our hospital.
On examination, she was mildly pale and not jaundiced.
There was no organomegaly.
There were no facial features suggestive of thalassaemia.
Her Hb was 8 g/dL.
The senior clinician recommended ‘a watch-and-wait policy’ and reassessment after 2 months.
A 34-year-old G3P2 11-week 6-day-old pregnant female patient presented to the emergency department with a history of confusion, nausea and vomiting.
Prior to this, she was admitted a month ago for hyperemesis.
At that point, thyroid function tests showed a suppressed thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) of 0.
01 (0.
27–4.
2 ng/dL) and high free thyroxine (FT4) of 3.
88 (0.
7 ng/dL).
Thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin and thyroid receptor antibody were negative ruling out Graves’ disease.
She was diagnosed as having gestational hyperthyroidism and treated with hydration and antiemetics, no thionamides were given
her FT4 trended downwards and she was discharged.
Since discharge, she continued to have vomiting, and also developed worsening of her mental status.
Although she was prescribed prenatal vitamins, she was unable to take them secondary to persistent vomiting.
She had a 30 lb weight loss in the last 1 month.
Vitals on admission showed tachycardia of 134 beats/min and a temperature of 98.
1.
On examination, she was cachectic and had difficulty answering questions.
No exophthalmos or thyromegaly was noted.
Heart and lung examination was normal except for the tachycardia as described above.
Neurological examination revealed a left-sided nystagmus, equal and reactive pupils, power of 4/5 and decreased reflexes were noted in all extremities.
Gait assessment, finger to nose test and Romberg’s test could not be performed.
Lab assessment (table 1) revealed elevated blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, aspartate transaminase, alanine transaminase and bilirubin.
TSH was suppressed, FT4 was very high.
CT scan of the head done to evaluate mental status changes was unremarkable.
Renal ultrasound, done for the evaluation of renal failure, did not show any obstructive pathology.
Lumbar puncture did not reveal any infectious pathology, and electroencephalogram showed non-specific cerebral dysfunction.
Thiamine levels were checked and were found to be low.
MRI of the brain showed T2 hyperintensities and restricted diffusion in the medial thalami, periaqueductal grey matter and dorsal medulla consistent with Wernicke’s encephalopathy.
On follow-up in the clinic 1 month after discharge, the patient’s mental status improved significantly
however, she still had nystagmus and ataxia.
She gave birth to a healthy baby boy at 37 weeks weighing 3150 g.
After 18 months of extensive rehabilitation, her gait is still very unsteady, and she is a wheelchair user for the most part.
She continues to have bilateral nystagmus
however, her mental faculties have improved and are back to baseline.
A woman in her late adolescence with DS was planned for hysteroscopy, dilatation and curettage with Mirena insertion to manage her menstrual cycle and improve control of her catamenial epilepsy associated with DS.
Catamenial epilepsy is a sex-specific seizure condition marked by the occurrence of seizure clusters during particular phases of the menstrual cycle due to hormonal fluctuations, largely occurring during the fall of progesterone levels from peak to steady state.
12 It is likely that the perimenstrual increase in basal body temperature may also have been contributing to the patient’s seizure occurrences in the setting of DS.
The patient was diagnosed with DS in a large tertiary hospital at the age of 5 following seizures since her first year of life, which were initially unilateral prior to becoming GTC and were frequently triggered by temperature fluctuations.
This clinical diagnosis was reinforced by an autosomal dominant pattern of SCN1A gene mutation.
Neither of the patient’s parents had clinical DS nor were genetic carriers.
She and her family have since relocated to a small regional town, where her ongoing follow-up has been conducted through telehealth with her treating neurologist.
At baseline, she has limited verbal communication and severe intellectual impairment, relying on full-time care.
Her DS is managed by avoiding all seizure triggers (including overexertion, hot water, and infection risk) and medication, including sodium valproate, stiripentol, clobazam, topiramate and cannabidiol.
Her epilepsy control has improved over the years, with seizure frequency prior to Mirena insertion occurring approximately once per fortnight, typically GTC in nature lasting around 30 s.
Seizures were often associated with menstruation and were extremely distressing for the patient.
A 52-year-old man with severe alcohol use disorder (per DSM-5 criteria) was referred to our institution to undergo treatment for his addiction.
At admission, he displayed agitation, severe impairment of attention, imbalance, postural tremor, a wide-based gait, and disorientation in time, space, and person.
He reported zoopsias, initial insomnia, and paresthesias of the lower limbs.
Neither ophthalmoplegia nor nystagmus was present.
There was no history of seizures or fever.
Laboratory results showed decreased hemoglobin (11.
9 g/dL), increased mean globular volume (115.
1fL), increased γ-glutamyl transferase (69U/L), and decreased vitamin B12 (174pg/mL).
The computed tomography scan was unremarkable.
Given this presentation, severe alcohol withdrawal syndrome was considered the likeliest diagnostic hypothesis.
The patient subsequently received intravenous hydration, folic acid 5 mg/d, haloperidol 10 mg/d, diazepam 10 mg/d, and parenteral thiamine 500 mg/d.
Over the course of 8 days, the patient did not improve.
He was examined by neurology specialists, who ruled out Wernicke’s encephalopathy.
The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) solicited at admission was then conducted, revealing bilateral ovaloid hyperintense areas on T2-weighted images and hypointense areas on T1-weighted images in the splenium of the corpus callosum.
There was also a discrete atrophy in the posterior body of the callosal commissure.
These features were highly suggestive of MBD.
Given the likely diagnosis of MBD, the patient’s therapy was adjusted.
He was given a 7-day course of parenteral thiamine 1,500 mg/d, oral B-complex vitamins, and intramuscular (IM) cyanocobalamin 1 mg/d.
We witnessed a gradual improvement of the patient’s clinical status following this therapeutic adjustment.
His agitation ceased, and he displayed progressively more adequate behavior.
His attention, orientation, speech, gait, and tremor improved, and the visual hallucinations disappeared
The patient, Ms A, was a married 53-year-old woman, who had completed 6th grade and was working at a pig farm.
She had no prior history of personal or family psychiatric disorders.
She reported no known medical disorders and was not taking any medication.
In June 2020, she was taken to the psychiatry emergency department complaining that her skin was infested by bugs.
She first noticed this in April and believed she had caught the bugs at her work.
Ms A stated that she could feel the bugs making tunnels under her skin, adding she could see the “little black bugs” and even had removed some with a tweezer.
She had already seen a dermatologist in May, who suggested she had a mental disorder and offered to refer her to a psychiatric appointment, but she refused.
At first glance, Ms A looked very thin and disheveled.
On further inspection, there were several self-inflicted lesions all over her body, at different healing stages, produced as an attempt to remove the bugs.
A particularly prominent lesion with inflammatory signs on her thigh warranted an evaluation from a general surgeon, who prescribed piperacillin/tazobactam intravenous for 7 days.
The mental status examination revealed the presence of delusional ideas of infestation, visual and haptic hallucinations (formication), insomnia, and a complete lack of insight into her condition.
She passively accepted admission to an acute psychiatric ward with the proposed diagnosis of primary delusional parasitosis (per DSM-5 criteria).
Antipsychotic treatment with olanzapine was initiated and slowly titrated.
During her hospitalization, she revealed that, 1 year prior (June 2019), she started having feelings of sadness and worthlessness, accompanied by a significant loss of appetite (and later weight) and onset of insomnia.
She attributed these symptoms to her 1-year-old grandson’s motor deficiency and her daughter being a victim of domestic violence.
Major depressive disorder was diagnosed (per DSM-5 criteria), and she was started on mirtazapine, which was later titrated to 30 mg/d
A 20-year-old man presented to the emergency department (ED) in a tertiary care center in Northern India with acute psychosis manifesting as agitation, irritability, and restlessness with his father and paternal aunt.
He was immediately managed with intravenous (IV) lorazepam 2 mg and IV haloperidol 5 mg, after which he became drowsy.
There was a 1 to 1.
5–year history of “presence of different entities” and weird noises made by the patient, noticed by his family members with a continuous fluctuating course.
The patient complained of a burning sensation, uncontrollable trembling, abnormal movements, and hearing internal voices in these episodes, during which he felt a loss of identity.
The family felt that he was overtaken by another personality, spirit, or external force, and they noticed he was talking in different voices, varying in pitch, tone, and volume.
They observed a snake crawling and hissing, “Lady Mustafa,” a Mujra dancer, and a personality with frequent crying spells.
The patient shared 2 additional entities, “Paris” and “Christopher,” and explained how he met his personalities in his mind, calling them his “friends.
”  The disorder affected his daily life with decreased appetite and sleep, loss of interest (eg, getting up from bed or daily religious recitals), and missing college (he was a first-year undergraduate engineering student).
He became irritable and decreased his interaction with family.
Prior to admission to the hospital, the patient left home without informing anyone, roamed the streets the entire night, and was “roaring like a lion” when he was brought home.
The next day the patient deliberately harmed himself by banging his head on the wall and by hitting himself on the head with a broken coconut shell.
On examination, the patient had self-induced abrasions and cuts on his forehead and restraint marks on his wrist.
In a later interview, he was still drowsy but euthymic and denied any abnormal perception at the time.
He started to suddenly behave and talk like a different accented girl mid-interview and later returned to his normal self.
Throughout the hospital course, the patient exhibited different “identities” in a random pattern with no noticeable triggers.
Ms A is a 44-year-old married white woman with a previous history of difficulty initiating sleep, which gradually disappeared but still left her with symptoms of excessive sleepiness associated with sudden “sleep attacks” lasting 2-3 days at a stretch and occurring 1 to 2 times a month.
Although she had previously started a sleep log, she reported never completing it but stated that her normal sleep pattern between episodes had been about 5 hours nightly.
The patient recalls having her first sleep attack 16 years previously in Saudi Arabia where she served voluntarily as a cook in the US Army for 4 months.
She attributes major stress as a significant contributing factor to the onset of her periodic hypersomnia given the documented nerve gas exposure and chemical warfare she was exposed to during Desert Storm while in Saudi Arabia.
(It is important to state here that Ms A, along with others who had similar toxic exposures in Saudi Arabia, are currently involved in ongoing research to determine the presence and extent of effects or complications from any of these exposures.
)  Preceding each episode, the patient reports feeling very hungry and having a strong desire for sex, and she has been told that her face looks like it is “melting off” because of its characteristic drooping eyes and facial dullness.
She remarks that despite being very hungry before her sleep attacks, she is too tired to eat and has to be fed by her family members before falling into a deep sleep.
Recently, Ms A has had increased urinary frequency a day before each sleep episode, which now serves as a strong indication that her sleep attack is going to occur within 24-48 hours.
She also described a sense of weakness lasting about 30-40 minutes before the onset of each episode.
During these prolonged sleep episodes, the patient is unresponsive to any attempts to awaken her and she becomes angry with family members because of their attempts to wake her.
She denies the loss of bladder control during these episodes and often wakes feeling refreshed, but with a migraine.
There is no family history of KLS or of any other sleep disorder.
The patient’s past medical history includes restless legs syndrome (RLS), fibromyalgia, and depression for which she takes gabapentin 900 mg, venlafaxine 75 mg, and fluoxetine 40 mg daily, respectively.
She had undergone magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography brain scans, which appeared normal.
A polysomnogram (PSG) performed in 2012 supported the diagnosis of RLS, and another in 2016 supported the diagnosis of hypersomnia.
The PSG revealed an increased periodic limb movement index of 20/h and an unremarkable apnea-hypopnea index of 1.
4/h.
Multiple sleep latency testing showed clinically significant mean sleep latency of 6 minutes but with no REM sleep, providing objective documentation of a non-narcoleptic form of hypersomnia.
The patient also had an elevated Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) score of 14.
A continuous video electroencephalography (cv-EEG) done on 1 occasion of her sleep spells indicated a short latency to sleep without epileptiform activity interictally.
Also, drug testing done on the same occasion was negative.
Also stated in the patient’s past medical history are low vitamin D, potassium, and magnesium.
Olfactory reference syndrome (ORS) is a psychiatric condition characterized by concerns about perceived body odor, which may be accompanied by repetitive behaviors to mask body odor and avoidance of social situations.
Ms A, a 23-year-old Creole woman with no history of physical disease, had been suffering from ORS symptoms for 10 years.
She was diagnosed (DSM-IV criteria) with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), which developed after the onset of ORS symptoms.
She had an overvalued idea that she emitted a sweaty body odor that disgusted people around her.
She interpreted other people’s frowning or distancing themselves as proof for her beliefs.
She experienced severe distress in confined spaces (classroom and public transport) where people could smell her presumed odor.
She regularly checked her odor, showered every time she left home, and used excessive amounts of deodorant.
She repeatedly sought consultation with dermatologists.
Due to avoidance and distress, her study performance and social life were impaired.
She had received supportive psychotherapy, which was associated with limited improvement.
Ms A was therefore referred for assessment and further treatment.
Pretreatment physical, neurologic, and laboratory evaluation showed no abnormalities.
A female infant born at 38 weeks and 2 days via induced vaginal delivery was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) for respiratory distress soon after birth.
The patient’s prenatal course was complicated by findings of a right fetal unilateral dysplastic kidney on anatomy scan and a need for induction of labour due to decreased fetal movement and severe pre-eclampsia.
After delivery, the infant was brought to the NICU due to respiratory distress requiring treatment with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP).
Her respiratory distress resolved after 1 hour on CPAP.
However, the infant was noted to have aphonia on examination, prompting bedside laryngoscopy on day of life (DOL) 1.
The laryngoscopy was notable for findings concerning for a glottic web.
Subsequent direct laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy on DOL 2 confirmed diagnosis of a Cohen grade IV anterior glottic web (75% occlusion) and a grade I subglottic stenosis (40% stenosis) (figure 1).
Surgical correction by lysis of the glottic web, as well as balloon dilation occurred on DOL 3.
The patient’s postoperative course was complicated by upper airway stenosis from readhesion after the procedures, as well as two failed extubations.
The patient required tracheostomy and keel placement.
Once stabilised, the patient underwent genetics work-up to evaluate for possible genetic causes of the dysplastic kidney and large glottic web.
The evaluation included spinal, head and abdominal ultrasounds (all normal, except for the known right multicystic dysplastic kidney), and an echocardiogram showing mild mitral regurgitation and mild left pulmonary artery stenosis.
Karyotype and microarray testing both resulted normal.
The decision was made not to pursue further genetic testing at that time.
On discharge from the NICU, the infant required gastrostomy tube placement due to poor feeding by mouth.
A late adolescent primigravida presented for a first-trimester ultrasound at 12 3/7 weeks’ gestation.
Sonographic findings were significant for cystic hygroma and shortened limbs.
Detailed personal and family histories revealed no known skeletal disorders.
The patient was counselled about the differential diagnosis including, but not limited to, aneuploidy and skeletal dysplasia and underwent CVS and microarray testing.
The patient returned 4 weeks later for an early second-trimester detailed sonographic evaluation.
Transvaginal and transabdominal ultrasounds demonstrated abnormalities of upper and lower extremities.
The limbs appeared to be replaced by soft-tissue masses ending in digit-like projections, forming hand-like and foot-like structures bilaterally (figures 1–4).
No humerus, radius, ulna, femur, tibia or fibula were identified.
The scapula and clavicle were identified.
A thorough skeletal evaluation revealed normal ossification of the skull with midfacial hypoplasia and a flattened nasal bridge.
The spine was noted to be poorly ossified (figure 5).
The ossified ribs were short extending only halfway around the thoracic circumference, with the edge of the ribs being flared or bell-shaped, bilaterally (figures 6 and 7).
The chest was noted to be hypoplastic.
The patient was informed of the severe nature of the skeletal dysplasia and received genetic counselling
Our patient was a young adult who had presented two episodes of spontaneous pneumothorax in a 10-month interval, first in the right lung, then in the left (figure 1).
The second episode prompted video-assisted thoracic surgery and left pleural talcage.
He underwent resection of large bullae in the apical segment of the lower lobe and in the anterior segment and apex of the upper lobe and was discharged 4 days later.
Besides a chest radiograph at 10 days, he had no other long-term follow-up.
The patient was a former smoker (5–10 pack-years), had already reduced his smoking habits after the first episode and entirely quit smoking after the second.
He described a first subcutaneous neurofibroma as having appeared on his right flank in middle childhood.
He presented with several café-au-lait macules, multiple millimetric cutaneous and some larger (centimetric) subcutaneous neurofibromas, mostly on the back, bilateral axillary freckling and Lisch nodules.
Both his father and paternal aunt were known for neurofibromatosis, with medical follow-up and molecular confirmation by genetic testing only for the latter
A boy in his early childhood, a known case of Goldenhar syndrome, born out of a non-consanguineous marriage sought medical attention for complaints of on and off cough and cold for the last 1 year.
There were no other significant associated complaints at the time of presentation.
He was diagnosed with Goldenhar syndrome at 2 years of age with a history of surgical removal of epibulbar dermoid 2 years back.
There is a family history of valvular heart disease in the paternal grandmother for which she underwent valve replacement at the age of 58 years and expired 4 months later.
On examination, he had an asymmetrical hypoplastic face (figure 1A), bilateral cloudy cornea, reversed bilateral epicanthal folds, wide philtrum, preauricular tags (figure 1B) and asymmetrical ears.
Anthropometry was normal (weight and height for age between median to −1SD and head circumference between −1SD to −2 SD as per WHO charts).
He had pectus carinatum.
The hearing assessment revealed the bilateral mixed type of hearing loss.
Examination of the musculoskeleton revealed significant joint laxity with the rest of the examination being normal.
A female patient in her late 50s presented with dizziness.
Echocardiography identified a 50 mm aortic root aneurysm and moderate to severe regurgitation of a trileaflet aortic valve.
The patient’s medical history included easy bruising, scoliosis requiring Harrington rod placement and prior inguinal hernia surgery.
Examination demonstrated pectus excavatum, soft, velvety and translucent skin with visible veins, and a tall palate.
Genetic testing identified the aforementioned TGFBR1 variant.
The patient underwent elective valve-sparing aortic root replacement.
Cerebral imaging demonstrated bilateral internal carotid artery tortuosity without cerebral aneurysm.
Abdominopelvic imaging identified dilated visceral vessels involving the ileocolic branch of the SMA with corkscrew tortuosity, a 10 mm saccular aneurysm of the proximal SMA, a 12 mm aneurysm at the bifurcation of the ileocolic artery (figure 1), and 6 mm dilatation of the jejunal branch of the SMA.
After multidisciplinary consultation, intervention on the ileocolic artery aneurysm was recommended.
However, due to diffuse ectasia and aneurysm formation proximal and distal to the ileocolic artery aneurysm, concern arose that coil embolisation could lead to bowel ischaemia requiring resection.
The patient underwent laparoscopic surgical resection of the ileocolic artery aneurysm and a small section of small bowel.
Histopathology of the resected aneurysm demonstrated a thin-walled aneurysm with intimal hyperplasia and myxoid degeneration.
After patient 1 was diagnosed with LDS, this female was found to harbour the same TGFBR1 variant in her late 50s.
Examination detected striae atrophica, soft, velvety and translucent skin with visible veins, varicose veins, bluish sclera, hypertelorism, a broad uvula with a raphe, abnormal teeth enamel, an elongated face, malar hypoplasia and pes planus.
Head to pelvis imaging at the time of genetic diagnosis demonstrated internal carotid artery tortuosity, but no aortic or peripheral artery aneurysms.
The patient did not return for follow-up until 8 years later when she was in her mid-60s.
Surveillance imaging then identified interval development of multiple aneurysms in the mesenteric vasculature.
There were two aneurysms of jejunal branches of the SMA, the larger and more distally located measuring 15 mm and the smaller 9 mm (figure 2).
There was an additional inferior mesenteric artery (IMA) aneurysm measuring 8 mm.
Adjacent mesenteric vessels, coeliac and hepatic arteries were highly tortuous and mildly dilated, and there was ectasia of the femoral vessels and their branches.
Cerebral imaging demonstrated markedly tortuous cervical carotid arteries but no aneurysms.
The patient’s aortic dimensions remained normal.
The patient underwent successful endovascular stenting of the larger of the two jejunal branch aneurysms.
Coil embolisation of the smaller more proximal jejunal artery aneurysm was abandoned due to severe branch tortuosity.
A female patient in her late 60s (a second-degree relative of patients 1 and 2) was found to harbour the same TGFBR1 mutation through cascade testing within her family.
She had a recent diagnosis of left hemidiaphragm paralysis.
The examination was notable for hypermobility, striae atrophica, pectus deformity, downsloping palpebral fissures, micrognathia, bifid uvula, tall palate, bluish sclera, flat feet, and soft, velvety and translucent skin with visible veins.
Head to pelvis imaging demonstrated aortic root dilation measuring 44 mm.
Mild carotid and vertebral artery tortuosity were noted, and in the abdomen, there was a 12 mm jejunal artery aneurysm at a bifurcation point, and several smaller mesenteric branch aneurysms measuring 4–6 mm (figure 3).
The patient did not have any high-risk features for aortic dissection and a shared decision was made to continue regular imaging surveillance of the dilated aortic root with a surgical threshold of ≥45 mm.
A young girl in her early childhood was referred to our clinic with a 3-year history of extensive oral mucosal lesions and a generalised cutaneous rash.
On physical examination, the patient exhibited white pseudomembranes on the buccal mucosa, dorsal surface of the tongue, lingual margins and soft palate (figure 1A).
These pseudomembranes were easily removable on gentle scraping.
Additionally, tenderness was localised to these areas.
Cutaneous examination revealed erythema, hyperplasia and scaling on the face, neck, shoulders and back.
Localised erosions, scabs and pigmentation were also observed (figure 1B).
Periungual tissue displayed oedema and erythema, and the patient’s fingernails were discoloured.
The patient’s cognitive development was within normal limits
however, her physical stature was noted to be below the average for her age group.
Microbiological analysis, including fungal smear and culture, confirmed the presence of Candida albicans in the oral mucosa, skin and nails.
Haematological evaluation revealed leucocytosis (white cell count, 12.
24×109/L
reference range, 3.
69–9.
16×109/L), lymphocytosis (4.
15×109/L
reference range: 0.
738–3.
664×109/L) and eosinophilia (0.
94×109/L
019–0.
458×109/L).
Immunophenotyping showed decreased CD3 (59.
9%
reference range: 62%–74%) and CD4 (28.
8%
reference range: 36%–55%) cell counts.
Endocrine evaluation indicated primary hypothyroidism, with elevated Thyroid-stimulating hormone levels (100 mU/L
2 mU/L) and decreased levels of free T3, free T4 and T4.
Serological tests for hepatitis B and C, syphilis and HIV were negative.
Radiological examinations of the chest and abdomen were unremarkable.
A male patient in his early childhood, previously well with no perinatal or postnatal concerns, born at term, was presented with his biological parents to a tertiary paediatric centre in the United Kingdom with fever, general malaise and a 2 cm by 2 cm oral ulcer at the border of his soft and hard palate, adjacent to areas of visible scarring.
There was associated tender cervical lymphadenopathy and a healing ulcer in his right axilla measuring 0.
5 cm with a clear border.
The patient had a history of a hoarse, croaky voice since birth and recurrent oral ulcerations since his toddler years (figure 1).
Ulcerations were not usually associated with fever and were of variable size, predominantly found on the tongue and lower gums.
Lesions would last about 5–10 days and would recur every 8–12 weeks, becoming more frequent in the months leading to his presentation.
These lesions were repeatedly treated by the general practitioner with antibiotics, to no effect.
Oral lesions were associated with recurrent erythematous, papular skin lesions, predominantly on the back, upper limbs and axilla, occurring every 4–6 weeks (figure 2).
Lesions would not blister nor appear pustular.
They would last on average 6–12 months, leaving visible scars in a linear and patchy orientation.
There were no lesions on the bottom nor were there any lesions on the genitalia.
The patient was started on oral co-amoxiclav, prednisolone mouth wash gargle along with hydrocortisone ointment 1% topically two times per day to the areas of skin ulceration.
Serological tests were also undertaken
A 15-year-old female with a nonsignificant past medical history and no previous hospital admissions was initially brought to the emergency department in a post-ictal state following her first-ever tonic–clonic seizure, which lasted approximately three minutes.
The seizure was associated with tongue biting, frothy oral secretions, and urinary incontinence.
On physical examination, she appeared drowsy but was otherwise unremarkable.
Initial laboratory workup, including a CBC, showed no abnormalities except for microcytic anemia.
A head CT scan revealed no abnormalities.
A plan was made for admission to observe and conduct further investigations, including MRI and an EEG.
However, she was discharged the same day against medical advice, and follow-up was lost.
Two months later, she was brought back to the emergency department after experiencing generalized convulsive status epilepticus (GCSE).
Upon arrival, her parents reported a 20-minute episode of tonic-clonic activity with loss of consciousness.
The patient had no recent history of infection, head trauma, drug use, travel, tick bites, academic decline, childhood febrile seizures, or a family history of thyroid disease or epilepsy/seizure activity.
In infancy, there were no reports of seizures or febrile seizures.
She appeared to be of appropriate weight and height for her age, with good nutritional status and normal cognitive development.
During the initial resuscitation, the patient received two doses of intravenous diazepam at 0.
15 mg/kg each, followed by a loading dose of phenytoin at 20 mg/kg over 30 min with no response.
Due to continuous seizure activity after 20 min, a rapid sequence intubation using general anesthesia was performed, and the patient was transferred to the medical ICU.
A thorough investigation was conducted to identify the cause of the status epilepticus.
This included CBC, comprehensive metabolic profile, random blood glucose, infectious workup, urine toxicology screen, CSF analysis and cultures, ECG, and cardiac echocardiography, all of which yielded normal results.
Head CT and brain MRI with IV contrast (Fig.
1 A and B) also showed no abnormalities, and the EEG was unremarkable.
An abdominal ultrasound was done and found no abnormalities
An Afghan 14-year-old girl was referred to the Pediatric Unit of Maiwand Teaching Hospital due to chest discomfort.
On arrival, she complained of one attack of localized middle-chest paint that lasted 30 min and was relieved by rest.
Her past medical and family history was unremarkable.
On general physical examination, a blood pressure of 110/70, a respiratory rate of 20/min, a heart rate of 69/min, and an oxygen saturation of 94% were recorded.
By systemic examination of the chest, a soft early systolic murmur (Levine III/VI) was found.
No abnormal clinical findings were detected in other systems.
Blood investigations were within normal limits.
The chest x-ray showed cardiomegaly, with a cardiothoracic ratio of 62.
5%, and bilateral costophrenic angles were sharp with no congestion (Fig.
The electrocardiography (ECG) showed a heart rate of 69 beats per minute, a normal sinus rhythm, an axis of +50, a PQ of 0.
16 s, a QRS of 0.
08 s, a QT/QTc of 0.
36/0.
36 s, and no significant ST segment shift was noted (Fig.
On day three of admission, transthoracic echocardiography revealed an ectopic opening of the coronary artery, a blood-stealing phenomenon at the pulmonary artery, and abnormal coronary circulation (Fig.
3), as well as pulsed color doppler confirming abnormal flow within the pulmonary artery.
Pulsed-wave doppler showed a left coronary wave pattern (Fig.
These echocardiographic findings suggested BWGS.
Furthermore, there was all-segment normokinesis, a left ventricular end-diastolic volume (LVEDV) of 72.
9 ml, a left ventricular end-systolic volume (LVESV) of 24.
9 ml, and a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 66.
1%.
Based on ECG and cardiac echocardiography findings, BWGS was suspected
hence, chest computed tomography (CT) and cardiac catheterization were advised.
The chest CT scan of the patient revealed the origin of the left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery, along with an aneurysm of the LCA (Fig.
5).
Coronary angiography showed an aneurysm or dilatation of the left coronary artery (Fig.
6).
She had a stable condition during her three-day hospital stay and on discharge and was referred to an advanced setting abroad for the surgical management of BWGS.
It was impossible to follow up once she left the country
The first case was the second child of healthy non-consanguineous parents of Palestinian origin.
She was born at 32 weeks gestation, weighing 1.
800 kg via normal vaginal delivery, and required admission to the Neonatal unit for prematurity and respiratory distress.
At 5 months of age, she was admitted to the pediatric ward due to recurrent vomiting, poor weight gain, and chronic constipation of 2 months duration.
Physical examination showed a dehydrated, pale, cachectic infant, with poor eye contact but normal power and tone.
Laboratory tests showed leukopenia, anemia, salt wasting, renal failure with elevated blood lactate, marked hyperuricemia, hypercholesterolemia, and hypertriglyceridemia.
Abdominal ultrasound showed normal kidneys, heart echocardiography revealed no pulmonary hypertension.
Moreover, Her clinical condition gradually deteriorated and within a few weeks of admission, she was in multiorgan failure, reached end-stage renal failure and regular peritoneal dialysis was initiated.
At 12 months of age, the patient died after developing respiratory failure.
Whole exome sequencing showed a homozygous variant in the SARS2 gene (c.
1175A>G (p.
Asp392Gly)), defined as a pathogenic variant according to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) classification
The second case was the third child of healthy consanguineous parents of Palestinian descent.
She was born at 36 weeks gestation, weighing 2.
400 kg via cesarean section.
She was admitted three times to the local hospital with vomiting, hyponatremia, and metabolic acidosis managed with fluid salt and bicarbonate.
At 7 months of age, she was admitted to our pediatric ward due to poor oral intake, poor weight gain, and recurrent vomiting for the previous 3 months.
Physical examination showed a dehydrated, cachectic, pale infant with good eye contact, with obvious axial and peripheral hypotonia.
Laboratory tests were significant for leukopenia, anemia, hyponatremia, renal failure with elevated blood lactate, marked hyperuricemia, and hypertriglyceridemia.
Abdominal ultrasound showed normal kidneys.
Echocardiography revealed no pulmonary hypertension.
During her admission, she developed generalized tonic clonic seizures, but had a normal CT brain.
CSF analysis including herpes PCR was normal.
Her symptoms were managed well with phenytoin and phenobarbital in the following months.
Patient (II) required repeated blood transfusions despite receiving erythropoietin treatment.
Unfortunately, she also developed progressive renal failure requiring peritoneal dialysis.
1169A>G (p.
Asp390Gly)), defined as a pathogenic variant according to the ACMG classification.
On June 13th of 2022, a 10-year-old female was admitted to the children’s hospital of Damascus complaining of pain in her left chest for the last 4 years, the pain was recurrent every one and a half to two months and was partially alleviated by regular painkillers and was always accompanied by a fever partially responsive to simple medication.
FMF was suspected clinically six months prior by another doctor and she was started on colchicine but was stopped by the parents.
Hyperpigmentated skin lesions started to evolve around that time initially on the posterior right thigh and gradually grew in size and the mother noted retraced skin over the affected area (see Fig.
1), similar lesions soon appeared on her other limbs (see Figs 2 and 3).
The child has no past medical or surgical history and there is a case of vitiligo and G6PD deficiency in the girl’s cousins and a demise due to presumable pemphigus vulgaris.
Physical examination of the respiratory, cardiovascular, intestinal and the central nervous system showed no anomalies.
No musculoskeletal deformities were present and examination of the joints showed no swelling or pain or limitation in movement except limited flexion in the right leg along with greater skin retraction in the right leg (see Fig.
4) and a stiffness in palpitation.
Scleroderma was also suspected.
Negative Anti-Scl70 and Anti Centromere Antibody and the absence of systemic presentations suggested a localized morphea affecting the stated limbs.
ESR (Erythrocyte sedimentation Rate) was tested multiple times all in which it showed elevation, other lab findings were within the normal range (including liver and renal function tests).
Testing was positive (homogenous) for ANA-HEP-2(Anti-Nuclear Antibody) at 1/60 dilution.
The symptoms which the patient presented with suggested a co-existing case of FMF.
The main 26 FMF genes (MEFV) were investigated and she tested positive for V726A and M680I mutations and heterozygosity confirming the diagnosis.
A 9-year-old girl, born in Thailand, was diagnosed with B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-cell ALL) and presented with epistaxis.
She underwent chemotherapy as per the very-high-risk ALL protocol, including vincristine, doxorubicin, L-asparaginase, prednisolone and intrathecal methotrexate.
Before starting chemotherapy, her chest X-ray was normal, and tuberculin skin test reported 0 mm.
However, she failed to respond to the induction phase and required augmented-consolidation treatment with cyclophosphamide, high-dose cytarabine, mercaptopurine and intrathecal methotrexate.
After a week of augmented-consolidation treatment, the patient developed febrile neutropenia, characterized by a complete absence of neutrophils.
Despite receiving IV piperacillin/tazobactam for 4 days, she continued to experience prolonged febrile neutropenia for duration 4 days.
Hemoculture, urine culture and serum Aspergillus galactomannan results were reported as negative.
To investigate further, a computed tomography (CT) chest scan was performed, revealing an air crescent sign at the anterior segment of the right upper lobe (2.
7 × 2.
2 × 2.
3 cm3) and multiple nodules in the lungs, indicating invasive pulmonary aspergillosis
A 14-year-old male patient presented with a 3-month history of non-painful patches of skin hyper and hypo-pigmentations, distributed over the trunk area.
The patient initially sought medical advice from a dermatologist who treated him with antifungals as a case of fungal skin infection without improvement.
At that time, he had no history of fever, night sweats, lymphadenopathy, arthralgia, hematuria or previous episodes.
Over the next months, he developed fatigue and exertional shortness of breath upon activity and reported occasional night sweats with undocumented weight loss.
However, he didn’t seek medical advice until 3 months had elapsed, when he developed yellowish discoloration of his sclera associated with dark urine and no change in stool color.
On examination, patient had scleral icterus and hepatosplenomegaly.
Laboratory tests revealed hemolysis with hemoglobin levels of 5 g/dl, mean cell volume of 122.
7 fL with normal folate and vitamin B12 levels, elevated reticulocyte count of 17.
2%, red blood cells (RBCs) 0.
79 × 106/μl, with leukocytosis and eosinophilia (25 × 103/μl and 7% respectively) and normal platelet count.
Anisocytosis was found on peripheral blood smear, with teardrops, microcytic hypochromic cells, schistocytes and nucleated RBCs consistent with acute hemolysis.
Coombs test was significantly positive, indicating autoimmune hemolytic anemia, high lactate dehydrogenase 576 U/L and bilirubin 4 mg/dl, Direct Bilirubin 0.
21 mg/dl, decreased haptoglobin levels and normal liver enzymes.
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was elevated to 94 mm by the end of the first hour and the C-reactive protein was 19 mg/dl.
Body fluids tested negative for microbiology.
The viral panel was negative for Epstein–Barr virus, Herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus, human immunodeficiency virus, Brucella and toxoplasma.
Coagulation, autoantibodies and kidney function profiles, urinalysis, complement levels were all normal.
Immunoglobulin levels were normal except for elevated IgE: 459 IU/ml.
Abdominal ultrasound showed a liver span of 14.
5 cm and spleen of 16 cm with otherwise normal findings.
Chest and abdominal computed tomography revealed enlarged lymph nodes in the perihilar regions of the lungs with hepatosplenomegaly.
The symptoms continued with a progressive course.
The patient was ill-looking, but stable vitally except for tachycardia.
He was maintained on supportive care and was given packed red blood cells.
A lymph node biopsy taken from the mediastinum via video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery showed sinusoids filled with S100 and CD68-positive but CD1a-negative, confirming the diagnosis of RDD
A 15-year-old, otherwise healthy, Caucasian girl was referred to us by our orthopaedic colleague for detailed assessment following a T12 wedge fracture caused by a low impact trampoline injury.
There were features of osteoporosis and a significantly reduced Z score on a DEXA scan.
She also complained of progressive fatigue with persistent low back pain and back stiffness for the past 8 months.
Thoracolumbar X-ray showed widespread biconcave and plate depression over the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae (Fig.
1), with minor loss of T9 vertebral body height and minor depression of the superior endplate of T8.
Physical examination noted a slim body habitus with mild kyphosis.
Her body mass index was 16.
9 kg/m2 at third percentile (Fig.
2) with a weight of mere 36.
2 kg, well below the fourth percentile for her age and height.
In view of the multiple wedge-shaped compression fractures throughout the thoracolumbar region on imaging that were likely to be related to significant insufficiency of the endplate, our orthopaedic team has considered the diagnosis of Scheuermann disease, especially in view of other signs to suggest haematological disorder and no prior history of prolonged steroid therapy.
She was then referred to a dietician and was given a review appointment.
However, 5 months later, she was readmitted for lethargy with patches of ecchymoses noted over bilateral knees.
Examination also revealed perifollicular purpuric macules over bilateral lower limb and forearms (Fig.
3), claimed to be present since the past 2 years with no abrupt worsening.
There were no joint swelling, joint tenderness, palpable masses or lymphadenopathies on peripheral examination.
Other systemic examinations were unremarkable.
Her blood pressure was normal for her age and height with a normal resting heart rate.
Our first clinical impression at that point was autoimmune disorders or vasculitis.
An extensive work-up was performed (including serum electrolytes, trace minerals and thyroid function) with equivocal results.
Her renal, liver functions, coagulation profile, Vitamin B12 and folate level were within normal limits, and Vitamin D level and iron studies were within acceptable range.
Her immunological screening with rheumatoid factor and anti-nuclear antibody came back negative.
Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate was mildly elevated at 42 mls/h (N:0–20 mls/h) and C-reactive protein was 6 mg/L
A man in his late 40s came to our emergency department with right flank pain and a fever of up to 39°C for the past week without urinary symptoms.
His medical history included tobacco use (30 pack-years), a body mass index of 26.
7 (overweight) and cocaine abuse for the past 15 years.
The patient denied other medical history or daily medications.
Symptoms began after he had been inhaling cocaine for 3 consecutive days.
On presentation, his vital signs were as follows: blood pressure of 140/70 mm Hg, heart rate of 69 beats/min, room air oxygen saturation of 99%, respiratory rate of 28 breaths/min, temperature of 38.
5°C.
The patient’s physical examination findings were normal: he had right flank tenderness without abdominal pain or rash.
Bowel sounds were normal, and lungs were clear.
Laboratory tests showed the following: leucocytes of 13.
23 x 109/L, haemoglobin of 137 g/L, platelets of 256 x 109/L, creatinine of 1.
02 mg/dL, Na+/K+ of 137/4.
6 mmol/L, aspartate transaminase/alanine aminotransferase of 29/60 U/L, C reactive protein of 8.
14 mg/dL.
His urinalysis was normal.
His chest X-ray showed no evidence of an acute disease process.
A contrast-enhanced CT scan of the abdomen showed an extensive right renal cortical tract with no contrast enhancement, markedly hypodense if compared with normal renal cortex (figure 1A: arterial phase, figure 1B: venous phase)
such enhancement defect persisted in the venous phase and was evident in the coronal and three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction (figure 2A: 3D reconstruction, figure 2B,C: arterial and venous coronal reformatting), findings suggestive of infarction.
The patient was hospitalised for 5 days and treated with enoxaparin and acetylsalicylic acid, resulting in a rapid improvement in inflammatory markers and almost complete resolution of the symptoms
A man in his 40s was referred by his general practice to the movement disorder clinic with a long history of tremor affecting his hands, which had gotten progressively worse in the previous 5 years.
He was initially diagnosed with essential tremor and trialled with beta-blockers and primidone
however, he did not receive any clinical benefit and had, therefore, been referred for consideration of DBS to treat essential tremor.
The patient’s medical history was otherwise unremarkable except for chronic back pain.
His regular medications included diazepam, amitriptyline and tramadol for the treatment of his chronic back pain.
The patient then went on to have an MRI Brain for stereotactic DBS lead placement planning which included T1-weighted volumetric imaging sequences, and T2-weighted sequences, providing high-resolution demonstration of cerebral and thalamic anatomy.
The MRI scan showed multiple abnormal features in the posterior fossa including a high T2 signal in the middle cerebellar peduncles bilaterally extending into the deep white matter of the cerebellar hemisphere, a high T2 signal seen within the superior cerebellar peduncles crossing towards the decussation of the superior cerebellar peduncles, the pons is relatively atrophic and there is an element of increased signal in the medial menisci bilaterally and in the median pontine raphe (see figure 1).
The radiological features were concordant with the patient’s clinical symptoms and drew the movement disorder team’s focus towards the clinical differentials of spinocerebellar ataxia and FXTAS.
Following the MRI scan, blood tests were arranged to screen for autoimmune and metabolic disease, and the patient was referred for genetic testing for mitochondrial disease, spinocerebellar ataxia and FXTAS.
The patient complained predominantly of a tremor in his hands
however, he occasionally noticed a tremor in his legs, head or a shake throughout his body.
The tremor was worse in his right hand, and he experienced intermittently numbness in the same hand.
This led to difficulties doing shirt buttons, cooking, dropping things and poor writing legibility.
He described being able to stop the tremor by shaking his hands.
He had chronic numbness of the right leg and felt unsteady on his feet requiring a crutch to stabilise.
The patient also reported chronic back pain in recent years.
Overall, the patient had not been able to work due to the plethora of symptoms.
On examination, there was no evidence of dystonia, rigidity or bradykinesia.
There was a severe bilateral postural and intentional tremor affecting the upper limbs and head.
The patient was mildly unsteady, uncoordinated and had gait ataxia.
He had normal tone and power in all four limbs.
In his right lower limb, there was reduced pin prick sensation in a patchy distribution.
His cranial nerve examination was normal
A man in his 20s with a medical history of syphilis, chlamydia and HIV presented to the emergency department (ED) with 2 months of right hip pain that had progressively worsened within the last month.
Initially, 2 months ago, he sought outpatient care from a nurse practitioner when the pain started.
After the negative lumbar X-rays (XRs), the pain initially was attributed to sciatica.
There were no physical examination findings available from the initial visit.
The pain continued to worsen after failing lidocaine patches and rest, eventually rendering the patient unable to ambulate.
Two months later, a CT lumbar spine was ordered, which demonstrated right femoral head dislocation, erosive changes in the femoral head and acetabulum, as well as a large hip joint effusion.
This prompted the patient’s visit to the ED the same day, where a physical examination revealed that the right lower extremity was shortened and externally rotated, consistent with the known deformity of the right hip.
Sensation and vibratory sense were intact bilaterally as well as dorsalis pedis pulses.
A hip examination performed in the ED revealed no active range of motion of the right hip.
Passive range of motion to 45 degrees with flexion and abduction of the right hip was possible with pain past 45 degrees and pain with any internal rotation of the right hip.
An MRI of the right hip was ordered, with findings raising concern for a superimposed septic arthritis and osteomyelitis.
This patient was incidentally diagnosed with HIV, chlamydia and syphilis during a general workup for health insurance 4 months prior to presentation.
The patient stated that he completed treatment for chlamydia and syphilis and that he was compliant with his bictegravir/emtricitabine/tenofovir alafenamide regimen.
The duration of his undiagnosed period is unknown.
The patient reported no trauma, fever, recent infection, alcohol use, smoking or illicit drug use.
An infectious disease specialist was consulted, who recommended delaying antibiotics until the results of the surgical cultures were available.
No arthrocentesis was performed preoperatively.
Orthopaedic surgery was consulted, and a right hip resection arthroplasty procedure was performed.
Intraoperatively, 30 mL of fluid from a right capsular haemarthrosis was obtained for cytology, soft tissue specimens from the hip were sent for culture, and bone debris from the acetabulum was sent to pathology.
Three of each of the following cultures were collected from the right hip, including aerobic/anaerobic cultures, fungal cultures, and acid-fast cultures and smears.
Cytological analysis of the right hip joint fluid revealed predominantly blood with the presence of lymphocytes, histiocytes and a few neutrophils, indicative of haemarthrosis
